From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Murray, David (GOV) 

Tuesday, January 05, 2016 1:10 PM 
Stoken, Laura (GOV) 

Note about Flint water story 


"We will cooperate fully with any requests from the U.S. Attorney's Office as it looks into Flint's water challenges. Gov. 
Snyder has appointed an Independent panel that is reviewing all state, local and federal actions related to the situation. 
We are committed to working with Mayor Karen Weaver and county leaders as we focus on protecting the health of 
Flint residents and all Michiganders." 


Dave Murray 

Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

Mur.rayDl^ 

517-335-6397, office 


Twitter:@michigandmurray 



1 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Murray, David (GOV) 

Tuesday, January 05, 2016 1:14 PM 
Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

FW: Genesee County request for Declaration of Emergency/Flint Water - Response 
Requested 

2016-01-05 Flint Water Governor's Declaration DRAFT.docx 


Dave Murray 

Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

fyt unsy ill'll 1 !!! r Q : 

517-335-6397, office 



Twitter:@michigandmurray 



From: Smith, Paul (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, January 05, 2016 1:10 PM 
To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

Cc: Scott, Allison (GOV) <scqttf^ Bedan, Morgan (GOV) < Be J Muchmore, Dennis 

(GOV) <Qychmor^ Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <A ge ni.fS?.r?Ti 1.0 0 1 JS Q E P. !'> J Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Baird, Richard (GOV) <b3j.rdr : g.'!T\ich Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

< b.Oi ( j.0.?. b. 0 ; JS :0: V. > J Redford, James (GOV) < Redf0rdJ@m5chigan.gov >: Posthumus, Dick (GOV) 

102 II .LG O ISir.O.-. SP. y > J Ackerman, Darin (GOV) <;icken;^ Lange, Michelle (GOV) 

< A FJ.lt fr.b 0 -is.Q J Murray, David (GOV) <M.UI.LMy.r^ Heaton, Anna (GOV) 

<hi St ^.T.O.O/l f.Tlt fr.t? Jif.st 0 > J Holland, Meegan (GOV) <HqjjandM2(®m Arwood, Cheri (GOV) 

< A f.MvLP.f?. .@f. FT-j. M 5 * 

Subject: Genesee County request for Declaration of Emergency/Flint Water - Response Requested 
Governor, 

On January 4, 2016, Genesee County requested that a "State of Emergency/Disaster." The Emergency Management & 
Homeland Security Division (EMHSD) of MSP has reviewed the request and now recommends that a declaration of 
emergency be granted. If signed today it will be in effect until February 1, 2016 (unless extended). 

A copy of the proposed declaration is attached. Please advise whether you wish to proceed as recommended. 

EMHSD has concluded: 

• The situation is sufficiently widespread and severe. 

• The situation adversely impacts public health, safety and welfare. The presence of lead in drinking water has 
been documented. The full extent and required remediation remain unknown. 

• The potential fiscal impact to the city of Flint is severe. The current situation poses an extraordinary financial 
burden. 


1 



The city and county do not possess the technical expertise to fully identify impacts and remediation. 


EMHSD recommends activation of the SEOC which will include: 

• Attendance by all state agencies; 

• Situation Reports by all state agencies for situational awareness and to develop a common operating picture; 

• Technical briefings by MDEQand MDHHS on the situation. 

Following initial SEOC briefings, state agencies must determine (in consultation with the state director of EMHS) if they 
need to play a role in ongoing SEOC operations to contribute to addressing the Flint water issue. EMHSD recommends, 
at minimum, that the following agencies should maintain a presence in the SEOC during the operational period: MDEQ, 
MDHHS, Ml Department of Education, DTMB, Department of Talent and Economic Development, and MDARD. The 
SEOC operational period is to be determined but will at minimum be 8-5 Monday through Friday. 

The initial focus of the SEOC will be to: 

• Identify and implement any needed protective actions to protect public health and safety; 

• Develop situational awareness and common operating picture; 

• Develop understanding of technical aspects; 

• Coordinate damage assessment; 

• Review resource requests; 

• Coordinate public information; and 

• Identify programs to assist in remediating damage. 

Finally, EMHSD staff recommends: 

• Activation of a Joint Information Center located in Flint which will include PIOs from Genesee County, the city of 
Flint, and other appropriate local agencies. 


Paul C. Smith 

Deputy Legal Counsel 

Office of the Governor - Legal Division 

517.241.5598 (office) 

(cell) 

sniithp29@michigan.gov 


2 



PROCLAMATION 


DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY 

WHEREAS, Section 1 of Article V of the Michigan Constitution of 1963 
vests the executive power of the state of Michigan in the Governor; and 

WHEREAS, under the Emergency Management Act, Act No. 390 of the 
Public Acts of 1976, as amended, MCL 30.401 to 30.421, the Governor is 
responsible for coping with dangers to this state or the people of this state 
presented by a disaster or emergency or threat thereof, and may issue executive 
orders, proclamations, and directives having the force and effect of law to 
implement the Act; and 

WHEREAS, under Section 3 of the Emergency Management Act, 1976 
Public Act 390, MCL 30.403, the Governor shall, by executive order or 
proclamation, declare a state of emergency if the Governor finds that an 
emergency has occurred or that the threat of an emergency exists; and 

WHEREAS, on April 25, 2014 the City of Flint, Michigan switched from the 
Detroit water system to the Flint River as a water source, the harmful effects of 
corrosive water struck the city’s water infrastructure, causing significant leaching 
of lead into the water which caused extensive damage to the water system and 
negative health impacts to the citizens; and 

WHEREAS, the area affected includes the entire City of Flint, within the 
County of Genesee; and 

WHEREAS, the damaged water infrastructure and leaching of lead into the 
city’s water caused widespread damage to public and private water 
infrastructure, elevated blood lead levels in humans and potentially pets, 
especially in the population of children and pregnant women, and causing an 
immediate threat to public health and safety and disrupting vital community 
services; and 

WHEREAS, from October 1 , 2015 to this date, the County of Genesee and 
the City of Flint have taken a number of actions to cope with the situation, 
including but not limited to switching back to the Detroit water system on October 
16th, declaring local states of emergency, activating the emergency response 
and recovery aspects of their emergency operations plan, marshaling and 
distributing required resources on a city-wide level, and issuing emergency public 
information and bulletins; and 



WHEREAS, local resources have been insufficient to address the situation, 
and additional assistance from voluntary organizations and the state is required 
to protect public health, safety, and property, and to lessen or avert the threat of 
more severe and long lasting impacts to the community; 

NOW, THEREFORE, I, RICHARD D. SNYDER, Governor of the State of 
Michigan, pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Michigan and provisions of 
Act No. 390 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended, do hereby proclaim that a 
state of emergency exists in the aforementioned county and municipality; and 

FURTHER, the Emergency Management and Homeland Security Division 
of the Department of State Police shall coordinate and maximize all state efforts, 
and may call upon all state departments to utilize resources at their avail to assist 
in the emergency area pursuant to the Michigan Emergency Management Plan; 
and 


FURTHER, termination of this emergency will occur at such time as the 
threats to public health, safety, and property caused by the emergency no longer 
exist and appropriate programs have been implemented to recover from the 
effects of this emergency, but in no case longer than February 1 , 2016, unless 
extended as provided by Act No. 390. 


Given under my hand and the 
Great Seal of the State of Michigan this 
5th day of January in the Year of Our 
Lord, Two Thousand and Sixteen. 


RICHARD D. SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 

BY THE GOVERNOR: 


SECRETARY OF STATE 



From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, January 05, 2016 2:10 PM 

To: 'david.bailey@thomsonreuters.com' 

Subject: RE: Flint water contamination investigated by US EPA, prosecutors 

Hi Dave, 

This threw me for a loop for a couple moments. There is an excellent television reporter based in Grand Rapids - 
Michigan ~ who I work with frequently and ! couldn't figure out why he was asking about this issue and when in the last 
week did he switch to Reuters. Now I get it. 

Here's our statement, which you can attribute to me. 


"We will cooperate fully with any requests from the U.S. Attorney's Office as it looks into Flint's water challenges. Gov. 
Snyder has appointed an independent panel that is reviewing all state, local and federal actions related to the situation. 
We are committed to working with Mayor Karen Weaver and county leaders as we focus on protecting the health of 
Flint residents and all Michiganders." 

Happy to help ail David Baileys, any time. 

Dave 


Dave Murray 

Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

Myr.rayPA^ 

517-335-6397, office 
Twitter:@michigandmurray 



From: david.bailev@thomsonreuters.com rmaiito:david.bailev@thomsonreuters.com1 

Sent: Tuesday, January 05, 2016 2:05 PM 

To: Murray, David (GOV) < MurravDl@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Flint water contamination investigated by US EPA, prosecutors 

Hi, 

I am a reporter from Reuters. Has the governor's office talked with the U.S. Attorney in Detroit or the U.S. EPA about the 
Flint water crisis? 

Have you been notified formally of a federal criminal or civil probe about the drinking water supply in Flint? 

Does the governor have a comment on the acknowledgement by the U.S. Attorney's Office in Detroit that they are 
looking into the contamination? 


l 


Any help much appreciated. 


Sincerely, 
David Bailey 


David Bailey 

Minnesota Correspondent 


Reuters News 

Phone: +1 952 582-1164 



david.bailev@thomsonreuters.com 

thomsonreuters.com 


2 



From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, January 05, 2016 2:11 PM 

To: 'Burr, Richard' 

Subject: RE: Detroit News request for comment on Common Cause Michigan's call for all Flint 

documents protected by FOIA 


Hi Richard, 

The Governor is proud of the efforts his office has made to increase transparency and accountability, including 
dashboards featuring metrics for each department and creation of a citizen's guide to how state and local 
governments spend money. We're always focusing on continuous quality improvement in this area. 

The Governor also has promised complete cooperation with the independent Flint Water Task Force that is reviewing 
all state, local and federal actions related to the situation as the administration focuses on the health and welfare of 
people in Flint and across the state. 


Dave Murray 

Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

fyi .M.Cr.a V.Q I : gov 

Twitter:@michigandmurray 



From: Burr, Richard [r:^ai:to:RBurr@detroifnews.cornl 

Sent: Tuesday, January 05, 2016 2:00 PM 

To: Murray, David (GOV) < MurrayDl@fnichigan.gov > 

Subject: Detroit News request for comment on Common Cause Michigan's call for all Flint documents protected by FOIA 
Dave, 

I just need the statement you gave to MLive, Flint Journal about the Common Cause call for Gov/ Rick Snyder 
to drop his executive privilege and release all documents and correspondence connected to the Flint water crisis. 

Richard Burr 

Politics and Government Editor 
The Detroit News 
160 W. Fort St. 

Detroit, MI 48226 
(313) 222-2294 
r bu r r@,detroltKews com 


i 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Murray, David (GOV) 

Tuesday, January 05, 2016 2:24 PM 
'Zach Gorchow' 

Statement 


We wit! cooperate fufiy with any requests from the U.S. Attorney's Office as it looks into Flint's water challenges. Gov, 
Snyder has appointed an independent panel that is reviewing all state, local and federal actions related to the situation, 
and we are fully cooperating with any requests made by that panel as well. We are committed to working with Mayor 
Karen Weaver and county leaders as we focus on protecting the health of Flint residents and all Michiganders. 


Dave Murray 

Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

Mu r.rayDlg; niich iga irj,goy 

517-335-6397, office 



Twitter:@michigandmurray 



1 


From: Brown, Eric (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, September 17, 2015 9:50 AM 

To: Bill McBride (mcbrideb@michigan.gov) 

Subject: flint water letters 

Attachments: 2015-09-09- Congressman Kildee Letter on Lead in Flint Water.pdf; Congressman 

Kildee Response re Flint Water.pdf; Hon. Daniel Kildee 09-15-15.pdf; Additional 
Support for Flint Water Improvement Plan, 9.14.15.pdf 


1. Letter from Kildee to EPA and MDEQ (received 9/9) 

2. MDEQ response to Kildee (sent 9/16) 

3. EPA response to Kildee (sent 9/15) 

4. Letter to Governor Snyder from Flint Mayor Walling (sent 9/14, received 9/16). Harvey Hollins has been asked 
to draft the response. 


Eric K Brown 

Senior Federal Policy Representative 
State of Michigan - Governor Rick Snyder 
Washington D.C. Office 
202.624.5840 (office) 


1 



0««t T. SOLOES 
Sim Osrswsrf, Mmowt 

commmQH 
Ftmtsm. sgsmcss 

SUKCSMSSTTSg (St 

Heusmo w te«*«e«£ 



vwsi^aroN ixsiss 


827 Camkon House Gffke Bw^'sns 
Wtmmmw, DC 2051 S 
ggS-3611 

(202) 22S-S3S3 (Fax) 
mwoi tws* 


SuBC3R«SrrE£ cm 



September 9, 20 1 5 


1 5 5 East Cousst Sweet #3B 
Fuw, MS 48Ss83 
(810) 238-0627 
(81SJ23S-88S8 (Fax) 


www, sASitwsse. wjsE^>ssy 
gg/StaO^W® 

0 ®ftefO«iKax>^-; 


Ms. Gins McCarthy 
Administrator 

Environmental Protection Agency 
1 200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 

Mr. Dan Wyant 
Director 

Michigan Department of Environmental Quality 
P.O. Box 30473 
Lansing, Ml 48909 

Administrator McCarthy and Director Wyant: 

The attached June 24, 2015, memorandum between two Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) employees, Miguel A. Del Toral and Thomas Poy, published recently by the American 
Civil Liberties Union of Michigan, suggests that there are high lead levels in the city of Flint, 
Mich., water transmission lines. Furthermore, this document reflects that children consuming this 
water had levels of lead in their blood in excess of three times what they were prior to the city of 
Flint switching its source w'atcr from the Detroit Water and Sewage Department (DWSD) to the 
Flint. River. 


In addition, this memorandum, makes recommendations to Mr. Poy, Chief of the Ground Water 
and Drinking Water Branch of EPA Region 5, to do three things. First, for the EPA to work with 
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) to provide technical assistance to 
the city of Flint to deal with water quality issues. Second, it suggests the EPA review the 
compliance status of the city of Flint in respect to its compliance with tine Lead and Copper Rule 
(LCR). Third, the memorandum recommends that the EPA conduct a review of the city of Flint 
testing procedures to ensure they are compliant with the LCR. 

Regarding this memorandum and the surrounding water quality issues in the city of Flint, I have 
the following questions: 

® Was this memorandum actually sent to Mr. Poy? 





Are the findings in the memorandum regarding the lead levels in the city of Flint water 
accurate? 


» If there were in fact high levels of lead in the water m the city of Flint, when did the EFA 
and/or MDEQ plan to alert the public? 

* What, if any, of the recommendations has the EPA followed from the memorandum? 

* Given the demonstrated level of lead in the water in Flint, MI, is the water safe? 

Regardless, 1 am very troubled by recent tests suggesting high levels of lead in the city of Flint’s 
water system. As you know, on the EPA’s website it says that lead above the “action level” in 
drinking water can cause a variety of adverse health effects, including delays in physical and 
mental development in babies and children. 

According to the Safe Drinking Water Act, the EPA has the responsibility of enforcing water 
quality standards. EPA, however, has given the primary responsibility of enforcing water quality 
standards to the state of Michigan via MDEQ. As such, it. is the responsibility of these agencies 
to ensure that the people of the city of Flint have safe drinking water. 

Thank you and I look forward to hearing from you soon. 


Sincerely, 



ec: 


State Senator Jim Ananich 

State Representative Sheldon Neeley 

State Representative Phil Phelps 

Mayor Dayne Walling, City of Flint 

Howard Croft, City of Flint 

Susan Hedman, EPA 

Thomas Poy, EPA 

Michael Schock, EPA-ORD 

Darren Lytle, EPA-ORD 

Denise Fortin, EPA 

Liane Shekter-Smith, MDEQ 

Pat Cook, MDEQ 

Stephen Busch, MDEQ 

Brad Wurfel, MDEQ 

Marc Ed wards, Virginia Tech 




RICK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 


State of Michigan 

DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 

Lansing 

September 16, 2015 



DAN WYANT 
DIRECTOR 


VIA E-MAIL 

The Honorable Daniel Kildee 

United States House of Representatives 

Washington, DC 20515 

Dear Congressman Kildee: 

Thank you for your September 9, 2015, letter regarding your concerns for the drinking water 
in the city of Flint (Flint). The Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) is 
working closely with Flint’s water department as well as the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (USEPA) to ensure Flint residents have ample water that meets state and federal 
drinking water standards. 

The MDEQ’s role is to administer its nearly 40-year-old state drinking water protection 
program based on federal guidelines. The MDEQ works with approximately 1 1,500 public 
water systems in the state to monitor for more than 90 primary drinking water contaminants 
and ensure that every supply consistently provides safe drinking water. 

In Flint, the city made a decision 18 months ago to switch drinking water sources. This 
change required them to take specific measures under the federal Lead and Copper Rule, 
which was enacted in 1991 to monitor water as it interacts with lead service connections 
and home plumbing. Flint’s test results were conducted according to the same testing 
protocols every Michigan community uses and the same protocols Flint has used to test its 
water every three years for the past 25 years. 

While the results from Flint’s testing show compliance with the federal action level for lead 
and copper, on August 17, 2015, the MDEQ instructed the city to move forward 
expeditiously with developing additional corrosion control treatment to minimize the 
corrosive effects between drinking water and lead service connections and home plumbing 
in the Flint service area. 

We appreciate and share your concern for the situation, and the MDEQ looks forward to 
providing you a detailed briefing next week. If you have any additional questions in the 
meantime, please contact Ms. Maggie Pallone, Deputy Director, Policy and Legislative 
Affairs, at 517-284-6704 or pallonem@michigan.gov; or you may contact me. 

Sincerely, 


Dan Wyant 

Director 

517-284-6700 



CONSTITUTION HALL • 525 WEST ALLEGAN STREET • P.O. BOX 30473 • LANSING, MICHIGAN 48909-7973 

www.michigan.gov/deq • (800) 662-9278 




The Honorable Daniel Kildee 
Page 2 

September 16, 2015 


cc: Senator Jim Ananich 

Representative Sheldon Neeley 
Representative Phil Phelps 
Mayor Dayne Walling, City of Flint 
Mr. Howard Croft, City of Flint 

Dr. Susan Hedman, Regional Administrator, USEPA, Region 5 

Mr. Thomas Poy, USEPA, Region 5 

Ms. Denise Fortin, USEPA, Region 5 

Mr. Michael Schock, USEPA 

Mr. Darren Lytle, USEPA 

Mr. Marc Edwards, Virginia Tech 

Mr. Harvey Hollins, Governor’s Southeast Michigan Office 

Mr. Bill McBride, Governor’s Washington Office 

Mr. Eric Brown, Governor’s Washington Office 

Mr. Jim Sygo, Chief Deputy Director, MDEQ 

Ms. Madhu R. Anderson, Deputy Director, MDEQ 

Ms. Maggie Pallone, Deputy Director, MDEQ 

Ms. Sarah M. Howes, Legislative Liaison, MDEQ 

Mr. Brad Wurfel, Communications Director, MDEQ 

Ms. Liane Shekter Smith, MDEQ 

Mr. Stephen Busch, MDEQ 

Mr. Pat Cook, MDEQ 




United 


States. ImviymrpreoM Protection Ageraw 
Regional. Adm ini strator 
Region 5 

77 West lackson Boulevard 
Ch icago, IL 60004-3390 


sep 1 1 aw 


The Honorable Daniel Kiidee 
Member,. U.S. House of Representatives 
Washington. D.G. 205154313 

Dear Congressman Kiidee: 

Thank you for your depute W ,2015 letter regarding drinking water qualify in the City of 
Tlrnt. ETA A aedysiy working D^tntment: of BnWidPmental Quality 

|MDEQ) to help lire City provide dean ami safe water. 

Consistent with the recoromendat loirs In the interna! hiftmbraijdnni: Piled 1 id your letter, 1 (P A is 
working with MD6Q Wmonlior Flint's ©Oniplianee: willl tlieifederal Lend and Copper Rule. On 
August 17, 2015, MD.LQ notified Flint that addit i ona! t reatmen t will be required to optimize 
corrosion control and the City is taking steps to do so. Experts from EPA1> Office of Research 
and Development hre providing tbelhdenlxassistanee to flint to implement those corrosion control 
improvements. 

Flint residents who atre concerned about lead in drinking water may request water sampling by 
the local water utility. General information about lead in drinking water and tips to reduce lead 
exposure are available at hdg:AWgfor,e^ 

Again, thank you for your letter. We look forward to a more detailed discussion at the rneeting: 
that is being setup on Monday. In the meantime, if you have further questions, please contact 
me or your staff may contact ©snise Fortin or Ronna fob Region 5 Congressional 

LiaisbhA at (3 i 2) §864(40. 

Sincerely, 

Susan Hedman 

Regional, Adrofofsifotdf 


: R.pC yeWt/ Ffcr. AW' « A&Sest ;OA.VV:S»wffi.O!: XfSS'S ••WOiWiWjj;?;; 




Dayne Walling 

Mayor 



September 14, 2015 

The Honorable Rick Snyder 
Governor, State of Michigan 
P.O.Box 30013 
Lansing, Ml 48909 

RE: Call for Additional Support for Flint Water Improvement Plan 
Dear Governor Snyder: 

On behalf of the Flint community, I am writing with a renewed request for additional support to 
address Flint’s water challenges to ensure that water is affordable and secure for everyone in Flint 
especially our vulnerable populations. I am asking for an additional $30 million in funds for Flint’s 
infrastructure and a new healthy homes initiative. 

Significant progress has been made throughout this year to increase water safety and quality and I 
thank you for the involvement of your office, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, 
and the Michigan Department of Treasury. A majority of items in the Water Improvement Plan 
are completed or underway. Most importantly, Flint is now in compliance with the Safe Drinking 
Water Act due in lar ge part to the installation of the new carbon filter. The infrastructure systems 
are being made more secure and efficient through the State grants. Now the City is committed to 
following the recommendation of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality to optimize 
the treatment process, reduce corrosion and further minimize risks from lead. 

The need to accelerate the City’s capital improvement investments remains and has been further 
increased by the continued financial stress and legal issues. Previously I requested support for 
replacement or forgiveness of payment to the Drinking Water Revolving Loan Fund due to Flint’s 
status as a distressed community and the gap in funding in the adopted capital improvement plan. 
I understand that the existing federal law does not allow the existing Drinking Water Revolving 
Loans that Flint is carrying to be forgiven in retrospect but the need still exists. Flint owes 
approximately $20 Million. One solution is for the State to grant a new $20 Million that is designed 
as forgivable from the start. Another solution is to provide 


City of Flint • 1101 S, Saginaw Street- * Flint, Michigan 48502 
vvww.cityoffl int.com * {0 1 0 ) 766 - 734 6 * Fax: ( 810 ) 766 - 72 1 ft 


The Honorable Rick Snyder 
September 14, 2015 
Page 2 


equivalent funding through an expansion of the grant program to Michigan’s Financially 
Distressed Cities, Villages and Townships with a supplemental budget amendment in cooperation 
with the State Legislature, 

The community’s heightened concern about lead leeching into the water from old service lines and 
home plumbing also needs to be addressed. We know that lead is an environmental contaminant 
and there have been many programs in place over the years to address sources in paint and pipes. 
Flint needs a new healthy homes initiative specifically focused on lead in water with $10 Million 
to start the process of replacing service lines for the most vulnerable households. Regardless of the 
source and treatment of Flint’s water, this long term threat of lead in pipes needs to be removed in 
the interest of public health. 

My approach continues to be to work with you and your appointed officials. State Senator Ananich, 
State Representatives Phelps and Neeley, Congressman Kildee, community groups, businesses, 
churches, foundations, the Flint City Council, and all of the City of Flint and State and Federal 
government personnel. We need every available expert and resource to address Flint’s water 
problems. 

Flint’s safety is my top priority. Just as the City and State have worked together on public safety, 
we need additional support for fixing the water problems. We need $30 Million in new funds to 
repair and update the city-wide infrastructure and to assist households in becoming lead-free. The 
entire Flint community deserves sustainable, safe, secure and affordable water now and into the 
future. Thank you for the consideration Governor and I look forward to future discussions. 



Mayor, City of Flint 

CC: Flint City Council President Joshua Freeman; Congressman Dan Kildee; State Senator Jim 
Ananich; State Representative Sheldon Neeley; State Representative Phil Phelps; EPA Regional 
Administrator Dr. Susan Hedman; Chief of Staff Dennis Muchmore 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Brown, Eric (GOV) 

Thursday, September 24, 2015 2:38 PM 
Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Re: Conf Call re Flint Water 


Yes, thanks 

Sent from my mobile device 

> On Sep 24, 2015, at 2:36 PM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michigan.gov > wrote: 

> 

> Do you want to be on this call? 

> 

> Original Appointment 

> From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

> Sent: Thursday, September 24, 2015 1:41 PM 

> To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Clayton, Stacie (GOV); Baird, Richard 
(GOV); VanSickle, Michele (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ); Wurfel, Brad 
(DEQ); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Lasher, Geralyn (DCH); Grijalva, Nancy (DCH); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Pleyte, Beth 
(Treasury); Walsh, John (GOV); Hall, Jean (GOV); Mcbride, Bill (GOV) 

> Subject: Conf Call re Flint Water 

> When: Thursday, September 24, 2015 3:30 PM-4:00 PM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada). 

> Where: Wwawwawi ftw i 'ii- ■ ' I w fe ii &M 



> 

> 


> <meeting.ics> 


l 




From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Brown, Eric (GOV) 

Thursday, October 01, 2015 10:43 AM 
Pallone, Maggie (DEQ) 

FW: Flint Water Issue - Rep. Kildee Letter Received By Federal Agencies 
09-22-15 Kildee Requesting Temporary Assistance for Lead in Flint Water.pdf; Flint 
Pediatric Lead Concerns REVISED.PDF 


Importance: 


High 


9/22 Kildee letter to FEMA, et al. 


From: Mcbride, Bill (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, September 28, 2015 5:53 PM 
To: Brown, Eric (GOV) < BrownE15@mIchigao.gov > 

Subject: FW: Flint Water Issue - Rep. Kildee Letter Received By Federal Agencies 

Importance: High 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, September 28, 2015 5:52 PM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < friuchrriored@rnichiaan.gov >; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) < demente@michigan.g,ov >: 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@rriichigan.gov >: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) < hoUinsh@rniehigan.gov >; Mcbride, Bill (GOV) 
< rnchrideb@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) < M u rra v D 1 @ m i ch i ga n . gov > : Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) < 'vvisniewskiw@michigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: Flint Water Issue - Rep. Kildee Letter Received By Federal Agencies 

Importance: High 


Please see attached and below just in case ... sounds like we should have follow up conversation with MSP team and 
make sure we're coordinating with DEQ, DHHS and Treasury. 


From: Kelenske, Chris (MSP) 

Sent: Monday, September 28, 2015 5:49 PM 

To: Etue, Kriste (MSP) < EtueK@rniehig3n,gov >; Gorski, Gary (MSP) < GorskiG@miebigan.gov >; Smith, Paul (GOV) 

< SmithP29@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Katarsky, Anthony (MSP) < KatarskyA@rniehigan.gov >; Leix, Ron (MSP) < LeixR@michigan,gov >; Banner, Shanon (MSP) 
< BannerS@rnichigan.gov >: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfels@michigan.gQv >; Murray, David (GOV) 

< M u rra y D 1 @ m i ch iga n.gov > 

Subject: Flint Water Issue - Rep. Kildee Letter Received By Federal Agencies 

Importance: High 

Attached are two documents for your information: 1) A letter from US Representative Kildee to Craig Fugate of FEMA, 
HHS, EPA, and CDC and 2) a PowerPoint on Flint water concerns. Essentially, Representative Kildee is requesting FEMA 
take action to resolve potable water quality issues associated with the Flint water system. 

This is the first we heard of the letter and I actually found out from the FEMA Region V Director when he called me 
about an hour ago. He and I discussed a few things on this and he will respond advising they need to work through the 


l 



local EM system in Ml (engaging the local EM and then EMHSD). They also are working through the local health 
department as I confirmed with Dr. Scott from DHHS. If Flint needs water or want water the first step is to handle it 
locally (at least on the EM side and then push up any gaps they cannot fill to us). We are not aware of any work the local 
EM has done in this regard. I will be with the FEMA Region V Director as well as the FEMA Administrator, Craig Fugate, 
this week if they have questions. 

I have advised Dr. Jackie Scott from DHHS and will be sending her the letter and ppt. 

Chris 


Capt. Chris A. Kelenske 

Deputy State Director/Commander 

Emergency Management and Flomeland Security Division 

Michigan State Police 

4000 Collins Road 

Lansing, Ml 48910 

(517) 333-5042 

"A PROUD tradition of SERVICE through EXCELLENCE, INTEGRITY, and COURTESY." 



2 



WiSHSNQTOM CJFrce 


Stii Dbtbjgt, UiSHxMf'J 


COSSM8TTES ON 

HfiANCSM. ssavices 


Suacoianitrree oh 
Housing «« (hsurjm«;e 



22? CwfHSii House Omcg Sumwa 
WASKSWTtei, DC 20S15 
;ss2j ggs-ssu 
(303} 235-S3S8 (Fax) 

BKTESCT OtW-S 


Subcommittee cm 
Mcmsxw Psycv m® Tfwas 

SSKKX! WHS? 

DgMSSSWffi POLICY SHO 
CcmMUNtc/CTKiNS Committee: 


ffimtgress of tyt Putted jitate 

praiss of prpregeitttiihrs 
pfegllTOgtan, ^CE 20515 


til East Ccwr Sraeer #38 
FUW, M! *10502 
(610} S38-S62? 

(810} £38-86§S (Fax; 


wwwow-t&nBc.HSjag.sw 


} /HspDANKaogs 


September 22, 2015 


Secretary Sylvia Matthews Burwell 

U.S> Department of Health & Human Services 

HHS Office of the -Secretary 



Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of the Administrator 1 1 0 1 A 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 


Administrator William Craig Fugate 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, S.W. 

Washington, DC 20472 


Director Tom Frieden 

Centers tor Disease Control and Prevention 

1600 Clifton Road 

Atlanta, GA 30329 


Secretary Burwell, Administrator McCarthy, Administrator Fugate and Director Frieden; 

Recent developments regarding the level of lead in the water in one of the communities I 
represent, Flint, Mich,, have raised significant concerns about the safety of its drinking water. 
For this reason, 1 am requesting immediate resources to provide safe drinking water to the 
residents of Flint until additional testing can be completed that confirms the water is safe, 


conducted tests and taken the position that the lead level in the water is safe and below the action 


of Virginia Tech University, an established drinking water expert, conducted his own tests as 
part of a study that determined the water in Flint was above the lead action level. 

Additionally, yesterday the Greater Flint Health Coalition, a group of health professionals in the 
community, released a report showing elevated blood lead levels in residents in Flint, 
particularly in young children. In response, the Coalition has requested that the Genesee County 
Health Department release a health advisory indicating that the water in Flint is unsafe to drink. 


Thus, I am requesting resources from your agency to provide dean drinking water to the 
residents of Flint until additional testing can determine when the water will he safe to drink and a 
long-term solution can be implemented. 

This is a serious health issue, particularly for young children, aid until the water is demonstrated 
to be safe, immediate action must be taken to ensure Flint’s residents have potable drinking 
water. 

1 look forward to working with you and thank you for your immediate attention. 


Sincerely, 



MEMBER OF CONGRESS 



Pediatric Lead Exposure In 

Flint, Michigan: 

A Failure of Primary Prevention 


Mrrnss U'^nns MH MPU CA4P 

IViOlleS ndUira Milos sd ;¥i Li iVSf si rnn? 

b- fc i b V' V W* b i J > U > V^r J > n) b > W -s5 ROb 

l\/s irh io':s n Cfntp ^ n rfr^ £& nt' csf' PAr!i?ifTir"«i smri Mnman 

f « b fVt b b b 5 bv^w Vv> 5 si v bw. si .\S > Vv ^.v' Oi v5 i i V' si 5 5u V * b V' b ^ S * W ^ <Ub j b \<-b j 5: \4 b si $ b 5 



Introducing Makayla* 


• 12 month old girl (DOB 8/15/2014) presented last 
week for her 1 year old check up. No concerns. 

• Lives with single mom and 2 older siblings in west 
side (48504). Formula from WIC; powder mixed with 
warm tap water. 

• Physical exam and development are normal. Makayla 
receives her 1 year old vaccines and routine lead and 
hemoglobin screening. 

• A couple days later, lead level comes back as 6 ug/dL. 



^Hypothetical scenario 


Blood lead level of 6 ug/dL... 


Blood lead levels (BLL) above 5 ug/dL are considered 
elevated blood lead levels (EBL) 

Just a few years ago (2012), 10 ug/dL was cutoff 

Increasing evidence shows NO safe blood lead level 

Disproportionately impacts low income, minority 
children 

Primary prevention is most important 



Primary Prevention 


• "Because no measurable level of blood lead is 
known to be without deleterious effects, and 
because once engendered, the effects appear 
to be irreversible in the absence of any other 
interventions, public health, environmental 
and housing policies should encourage 
PREVENTION of all exposure to lead " 


"Low Level Lead Exposure Harms Children: A Renewed Call for Primary Prevention " 2012 
CDC Advisory Committee on Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention. 



What will happen to Makayla? 


• Vast evidence supports increased likelihood of: 

- Decrease in IQ 

• An increase in BLL from 1 to 4 ug/dL, drops mean IQ -3.7 points 

- Small change in mean IQ, shifts entire population IQ 
distribution 

• Reduces high achievers IQs (>130) and increases kids with low IQs 
(<70) 

• Implications for special education services, employment, 
incarceration, life achievement, etc 


Lanphear BP et al.. Low-level environmental lead exposure and children's intellectual function: an international 
pooled analysis. Environ Health Perspect, 2005. 113:894-9. 

Fewtrell U, Pruss-Ustun A, Landrigan P, and Ayuso-Mateos JL, Estimating the global burden of disease of mild mental 
retardation and cardiovascular diseases from environmental lead 
exposure. Environmental Research, 2004. 94:120-33. 



Behavioral Burden 


Increased likelihood of : 

— ADHD behaviors 

— Delinquent behaviors and arrests 

— Total arrests and increased rates of arrests 
involving violent offenses 

— Other health effects: hematologic, cardiovascular, 
immunologic, endocrine, etc 


Wright, JP, KN Dietrich, MD Ris, et al. 2008. Association of prenatal and childhood blood lead concentrations with criminal arrests in early 
adulthood. PLoS Med 5(5): elOl 

Chen, A, B Cai, KN Dietrich, et al. 2007. Lead exposure, IQ, and behavior in urban 5-7 year-olds: Does lead affect behavior only by lowering IQ? 
Pediatrics 119(3): e650-e658. 

Needleman, HL, C McFarland, RB Ness, et al. 2002. Bone lead levels in adjudicated delinquents: A case control study. Neurotoxicology and 
Teratology 24(6):711-717. 



The Cost 


"For childhood lead poisoning, $5.9 million in medical care costs, as well 
as an additional $50.9 billion (sensitivity analysis: $44.8-$60.6 billion) in 
lost economic productivity resulting from reduced cognitive potential from 
preventable childhood lead exposure." 


"The present value of Michigan's economic losses attributable to lead 
exposure in the 2009 cohort of 5 year-olds ranges from $3.19 (using U.S. 
blood lead levels) to $4.85 billion (using Michigan blood lead levels) per 
year in loss of future lifetime earnings." 


Leonardo Trasande and Yinghua Liu. Reducing The Staggering Costs Of Environmental Disease In 
Children, Estimated At $76.6 Billion In 2008. Health Affairs, 30, no. 5 (2011):863-870 

The Price of Pollution: Cost Estimates of Environment-Related Childhood Diseases in Michigan. 2010 
Report by Michigan Network of Children's Environmental Health 



Lead in Water 


• Increasing as source of lead, because of success in controlling 
other sources. 

• Increasing due to aging water infrastructures, change in water 
sources, disinfectant uses, etc 

• Disproportionally impacts developmentally-vulnerable 
formula-fed infants and pregnant mothers 

— For about 25% o f infants drinking formula made from tap water at 10 
ppb, blood lead would rise above the CDC level of concern of 5 
micrograms/deciLiter (or ug/dL). 

- Increase in fetal death and reduced birth weights 


Triantafyllidou, S., Gallagher. D. and Edwards, M. Assessing risk with increasingly stringent public health goals: the case of water lead and blood 
lead in children. Journal of Water and Health, doi: 10.2166/wh. 2013. 067 58-68 (2014). 

Edwards, M. Fetal Death and Reduced Birth Rates Associated with Exposure to Lead-Contaminated Drinking Water. Env. Sci. and Tech. 2013 DOI: 
10.1021/es4034952 



Preliminary Results 



Conclusions from BLL analysis 


% of children with EBL in Flint has increased 

— Most striking increase in zip codes with highest water 
lead levels 

Results underestimate risk: infants not screened 
for lead and water usage unknown. 

— Accurate exposure largely unknown since national 
childhood lead screening focuses on household lead 
exposure (paint, soil, dust) at later ages (1 and 2 yrs) 


Results are consistent and concerning. Primary 
prevention has failed. 



Next Steps 


Immediately limit further exposure 

— Encourage breast feeding 

— No tap water for high risk groups: infants on formula & 
pregnant mothers 

— Declare health advisory: allows WIC to administer water or 
ready-to-feed formula and other resources (Salvation Army 
& United Way water supplies) 

— Distribution of lead clearing NSF-approved filters 

— Public education regarding precautions (flushing, etc) 

— Re-connect to Lake Huron water source ASAP 



And Makayla 


Asymptomatic now 

But what will her future hold 
and an entire generation of 
Flint children? 






Subject: 

Location: 


DM/EC/JA/RB/JW/JR/HH/SW/DM/DW/NL/GL/DP or DA or ML re Flint next steps 
Governor's Conference Room - 2nd Floor Romney (call in number below) 


Start: Wed 10/14/2015 11:30 AM 

End: Wed 10/14/2015 12:00 PM 

Recurrence: (none) 

Meeting Status: Accepted 

Organizer: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Required Attendees: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Walsh, 

John (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Murray, 
David (GOV); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Lyon, Nick (DHHS); Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS); 
Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Ackerman, Darin (GOV); Lange, Michelle (GOV); Rospond, 
Laurie (GOV); Thomet, Ruth (GOV); Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ); Grijalva, Nancy (DHHS); 
Hall, Jean (GOV); VanSickle, Michele (GOV); Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Optional Attendees: Wells, Eden (DHHS) 



MDHHS Action Plan 
Flint EBL.DO... 

Conference N umber - 
Access Code^^WmB^ 

Host Code - (Jarrod to host) 


l 



Michigan Department of Community Health (MDHHS) Flint Water Action Plan 



Action 

Local Lead 

MDHHS 

Lead 

Tasks 

Filter/Water 

Distribution 

Tamara Brickley 
(Genesee County 
Health 

Department-GCHD) 

Sheryl 

Thompson, 

MDHHS 

Coordination of distribution (GCHD) 
Identify at-risk sub-groups (GCHD) 
Tracking filters- uniform registry held by 
GCHD 

Ordering filter replacements (MDHHS) 


Blood Testing 

Tony LaRocco 
(GCHD) 

Possible partners: 
Hurley 
Great Flint 
Health 
Coalition 

- MIHP 

- LHD 
Schools 

Dr. Eden 

Wells/ 

Nancy 

Peeler 

(CLPPP) 

Test all 

o Students 0-16 
o Priorities: 

■ 3 schools 

■ 2 zip codes 

■ ages 0-15 

Convene meeting with GCHD and all 
potential partners (MDHHS) 
o Partner with schools- 

information about testing sites 
options distributed through 
school districts to parents 
o Partner with Great Flint Health 
Coalition-network to develop 
testing sites and information 
about testing to healthcare 
providers 
o Partner with 

Hurley/McClaren/Genesys 
o Partner with MIHP/Home 
Visiting Program 

Confirm that the state lab has capacity 
to handle increase in tests- CONFRIMED 

Case 

Management 
Follow Up 

Tony LaRocco 
(GCHD) 

Eden 

Wells/ 

Nancy 

Peeler 

(CLPPP) 

Identification of all current positives- 
confirmatory testing for >5 mcg/dl (as 
of April 2014) 

Maintain registry of all tests performed 

(-/+) 

Follow-up all cases >5 mcg/dl with the 
CLPP Case Management protocol 


Elevated Blood 
Level 

Investigations! 
all > 5 mcg/dl) 

Dawn Hailwood 
(GCHD) 

Linda 

Dykema 

Secure financial resources necessary to 
support environmental health response 
Follow-up CLPPP to see if immediate 
funds available 

Recommendation to contract with Lead 
Investigation company thru SEMHA- 







licensed investigators 


Communications 

Hilda McShane 
(GCHD) 

Geralyn 

Lasher 

Daily MDHHS and GCHD phone calls 
(3PM) 

Provide provider education- links sent 
for Governor's site to GCHD 10/12 
Provide public education 
Provide risk education 
Provide links with lead prevention 
information to Flint 





From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Allard, Claire (GOV) 

Tuesday, June 02, 2015 10:03 AM 
Redford, James (GOV); Weber, Travis (GOV) 
FW: Local Government Update 
Loc Gov Update May 2015.docx 


As promised. 

Thanks. 

Claire 


From: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Sent: Friday, May 15, 2015 12:42 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Cc: Baird, Richard (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Khouri, Nick (TREASURY); Saxton, Thomas 
(Treasury); Koryzno, Edward (Treasury); Roberts, John (DTMB); Allard, Claire (GOV); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 
Subject: Local Government Update 

Allison, Dennis, and Beth: Attached is the periodic update on distressed local governments. Please pass on to the 
Governor as appropriate. If you have any questions, please don't hesitate to call. Wayne 



RICK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 

DATE: 

TO: 

FROM: 

SUBJECT: 


State of Michigan 
DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY 


NICK A. KHOURI 
STATE TREASURER 


May 15, 2015 

Rick Snyder, Governor 

Wayne Workman, Deputy State Treasurer 

Status of Financially Stressed Local Governments 


EMERGENCY MANAGER 



Page 2 








Flint 

RTAB Appointed: April 29, 2015 

RTAB Members: Frederick Headen, Brian Larkin, David McGhee, Beverly Walker-Griffea, 
Robert McMahan 




Page 5 


EM Gerry Ambrose issued an EM Order on March 19, 2015 that restructured the State 
Revolving Fund loans and provides approximately $2.2M, allowing the city to invest in 
capital improvements to the water system. 



The City of Flint continues to inform residents that it is in violation of the Clean Water 
Standards Act, after unsafe levels of trihalomethanes (TTHM, a disinfectant by-product) 
were found in the water. Recent testing by the Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality (MDEQ) Testing Lab showed that the total TTHM levels for the month of March 
are well within the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) guidelines for safe water. 
However, because EPA regulations require that the four month average for all testing 
sites be within certain guidelines, the city is still considered to be non-compliant by the 
MDEQ. Monthly testing remains ongoing and is being conducted by several parties. 

The city hired Veolia to provide an analysis of the water system, including recommended 
improvements and associated costs. Recommendations included water plant 
improvements, distribution system improvements, new policies and procedures, and 
better communication with customers. The city is installing a $1.5M granulated active- 
charcoal filter to improve water quality. This filter installation will be completed in mid- 



Significant Actions/Issues 

On February 3, 2015, the city was awarded $2M through the Financially Distressed 
Cities, Villages, and Townships Grant Program. These funds will be used to enhance the 
city’s water system through improved waste management, leak detection, and pipe 
assessments. Pre-planning for implementation of these activities is underway. 





Page 6 




Page 7 







Page 8 




Page 9 






Page 10 






From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Friday, August 07, 2015 4:01 PM 

To: Redford, James (GOV) 

Cc: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Murray, 

David (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Subject: RE: PRESS RELEASE: Statement RE Shears vs. CoF Decision 


Story just posted. It has to do with hot topic of Flint water. Looping in Dave and Jarrod too, 

judge orders Flint to cut water rates 35 percent in sweeping injunction 
http://www.miive.coi'n/news/fiin t/ index,ssf/201 5/ 0 8/ fiint ordered to cut water rathtmi 


FLINT, Ml - Less than four months after the city's financial emergency ended, a judge's order has city officials talking 
about a potential bankruptcy all over again ... 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Friday, August 07, 2015 3:43 PM 
To: Redford, James (GOV) 

Cc: Dennis Muchmore; Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Beth Clement 
Subject: FW: PRESS RELEASE: Statement RE Shears vs. CoF Decision 

Importance: High 


This isn't the retiree health care case, right? 


Any details or insight we have and how big of deal this may be on city's finances and next steps/state involvement? 


Also looping in quick with Treasury. 

From: Jason Lorenz [mailtodlorenzfgia’tyofflinf.coml 

Sent: Friday, August 07, 2015 2:32 PM 

Subject: PRESS RELEASE: Statement RE Shears vs. CoF Decision 


For Immediate Release 


Statement from the City Attorney Regarding Court’s Ruling in Shears vs City of Flint 


Flint, Michigan - August 7, 2015 - In response to the 7 th Circuit Court’s ruling today in the case of Shears vs City 
of Flint, the following statement has been issued by City Attorney Pete Bade: 


l 



“Today's ruling is striking in terms of both its deviation from Michigan law, as well as the immediate financial 
harm it will cause the City of Flint. This will have a devastating financial impact. The City will immediately 
seek a stay of this order and review by the Court of Appeals.” 

-Pete Bade 

City Attorney 

City of Flint 

-END- 

-Jason Lorenz 
Public Information Officer 
City of Flint 

(810) 237-2039 (Office) 



2 




From: 

Brader, Valerie (LARA) 

Sent: 

Thursday, October 01, 2015 11:12 AM 

To: 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Cc: 

Redford, James (GOV) 

Subject: 

ACLU and Flint Water 


Dan - FYI. I used to commute to Detroit with Mike Steinberg, who is head of litigation for the ACLU in Michigan. He just 
called to say they may be getting involved with the Flint case to see if they can force Flint to go back to DWSD. He 
wanted to call and see if I was involved so they could have a conversation before they come in. I said I had no more 
involvement and said he should talk to you - that I would let you know and give him your number. He is pretty straight- 
up in terms of letting you know where they will go and you can trust him if there is a settlement discussion to play it 
straight. That said, he has been with the ACLU for years, so you know where they are likely to be and be able to go. His 
cell number is 

--Valerie 

Valerie J.M. Brader 

Executive Director, Michigan Agency for Energy 
Office: 517-284-8335 




From: GOV Newsroom <govnewsroom@govsubscriptions.michigan.gov> 

Sent: Wednesday, October 21, 2015 2:07 PM 

To: Redford, James (GOV) 

Subject: NEWS RELEASE: Gov. Rick Snyder announces Flint Water Task Force to review state, 

federal and municipal actions, offer recommendations 



Contacts: Sara VYurfei or Dave Murray FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 

51 7-335-6397 Wednesday, Oct. 21 , 201 5 



Experts in public health, water management, environmental protection to focus on steps to 

protect residents 

LANSING, Mich. - Gov. Rick Snyder today announced the creation of an independent advisory 
task force charged with reviewing actions regarding water use and testing in Flint and offer 
recommendations for future guidelines to protect the health and safety of all state residents. 

Task force members include experts in public health and medicine, water management, and 
environmental protection from both sides of the aisle, and will be co-chaired by Ken Sikkema of 
Public Sector Consultants and Chris Kolb, of the Michigan Environmental Council. Also serving will 
be Dr. Matthew Davis of the University of Michigan Health System, Eric Rothstein, of the Galardi 
Rothstein Group and Dr. Lawrence Reynolds of Mott Children’s Health Center in Flint. 

“Transitioning back to the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department-Great Lakes Water Authority is 
a good first step to protecting public health in Flint, but it’s not the last step,” Snyder said. “Bringing 
in outside experts to evaluate our actions and help monitor and advise on potential changes to law, 
procedures and practices will be key to continuing work on the comprehensive action plan and 
ensuring safe drinking water for all the residents in Flint and all of Michigan.” 

Snyder said the administration will fully cooperate with task force members, saying he wants an 
unbiased report focusing on steps taken in the past and recommendations that could improve 
practices to ensure all residents have access to safe, clean water. 

i 





Ken Sikkema is a senior policy fellow at Public Sector Consultants, where he specializes in public 
finance, environment, and energy policy. Prior to joining the firm, Sikkema served in both the 
Michigan House and Senate, culminating with four years as Senate majority leader. He has also 
served as both an adjunct and visiting professor at Grand Valley State University. 

Chris Kolb is president of the Michigan Environmental Council, a statewide coalition of 70 
environmental, public health and faith-based nonprofit groups. Before joining the MEC, Kolb 
represented Ann Arbor in the state House for six years and served six years on the Ann Arbor City 
Council. He has been president of the MEC for six years. 

Matthew Davis, M.D., M.A.P.P., is professor of pediatrics and internal medicine at the University 
of Michigan Health System and professor of public policy at the Gerald R. Ford School at the 
University of Michigan, having joined the faculty in 2000. Davis also is a professor of health 
management and policy at the School of Public Health. He previously served as the chief medical 
executive of the Michigan Department of Community Health/Department of Health and Human 
Services. 

Eric Rothstein is a national water issues consultant and principal at the Galardi Rothstein Group. 
He served as an independent advisor on the creation of the Great Lakes Water Authority. 

Rothstein also has served as Jefferson County, Alabama’s rate consultant and municipal adviser 
for litigation related to the county’s bankruptcy and issuance of $1 .7 billion in sewer warrants and 
led strategic financial planning for the City of Atlanta’s Department of Watershed Management. He 
has more than 30 years of experience in water, wastewater and stormwater utility finance and rate- 
making assessments. 

Lawrence Reynolds, M.D., is a pediatrician in Flint who serves as president of the Mott Children’s 
Health Center. He received his medical degree from Howard University College of Medicine and 
has been in practice for 36 years. He has served as president of the Genesee County Medical 
Society and the Michigan Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics. He has been honored 
for his humanitarian and advocacy efforts on behalf of children from the Community Foundation of 
Greater Flint. 

Snyder has said reconnecting with the authority is a critical step to resolving water quality issues 
and addressing related health concerns. It will not immediately resolve the city’s problem with lead 
service lines or aging infrastructure. It will take time for pipes in Flint to become coated with the 
phosphate corrosion control. 

To best protect public health, state and local authorities will continue to carry out steps outlined on 
Oct. 2 in a comprehensive action plan, including continued testing, the use of faucet filters and 
providing residents with accurate information about steps to eliminate lead exposure. The Michigan 
Departments of Environmental Quality and Health and Human Services are continuing to provide 
free water filters, free lead testing through the state laboratory for Flint water customers, and hiring 
additional staff to conduct health exposure monitoring for lead in drinking water. 

a a a a 
TTTtTTTt 

II II II II 


STAY CONNECTED: 


2 




■ his small was sent to • edfordi@-r:ichigau.gev on hohalf of: The Executive Office- of the Governor • 111 Sooth Capitol Avenue Lansing. Mi 48909 517-335- 
7856 


3 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Thomet, Ruth (GOV) 

Monday, November 16, 2015 9:08 AM 
Stoken, Laura (GOV); Redford, James (GOV) 

RE: Safe Drinking Water Act Notice of Intent to Sue 


Thank you, Laura. And you are correct - these come to us when the Governor and/or SOM are a named party. 


From: Stoken, Laura (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, November 16, 2015 9:03 AM 

To: Redford, James (GOV) < Redfordj@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Thomet, Ruth (GOV) < ThometR@rnichigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: Safe Drinking Water Act Notice of Intent to Sue 

Importance: High 

Good morning sir, 

Please see beiow (attached) correspondence that came into the Governor's public facing e-mail box, I am forwarding 
onto you for action determination. 


Please let me know if I am sending it you by mistake. 


Thanks, 


Laura 


From: Chaudhary, Dimple [ mailto:dchaudhary@nrdc.orgl 

Sent: Monday, November 16, 2015 9:00 AM 
(GOV) 

Subject: Safe Drinking Water Act Notice of Intent to Sue 
Dear Governor Snyder, 

Attached please find a Notice of Intent to sue under the federal Safe Drinking Water Act for failure to control lead in 
drinking water in Flint, Michigan, and failure to assist Michigan schools with lead testing and remediation. We have also 
sent you the Notice and a CD of exhibits today by certified mail, return receipt requested. 

Best regards, 


l 



Dimple Chaudhary 


Dimple Chaudhary, Senior Attorney* 

Natural Resources Defense Council 

1152 15th Street NW, Suite 300, Washington, DC 20005 

Tel. 202.289.2385 | email: dchaudhary@nrdc.org 

*admitted in the District of Columbia and New York 

PRIVILEGE AND CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE 

This message is intended only for the addressee and may contain information that is privileged, confidential, and exempt from disclosure under law. If you are not the 
intended recipient, please notify me immediately by email and delete the original message. 


2 



From: Becker, Timothy (DHHS) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 7:49 PM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Kelenske, Chris 

(MSP); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Creagh, 
Keith (DNR); Roberts, John (DTMB); Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 

Subject: Re: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 


Re 4 on costs: our budget folks at MDHHS completed today, i will forward that along with my comments when I get to 
my laptop. 

Tim 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Dec 30, 2015, at 6:57 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) <ba i rd r @ m i ch j ga n .go v> wrote: 

Team: 

Today Harvey and I met with the Flint Water Task Force. It was a good meeting. People were pleased 
with the G's statement from the prior day. Captain Kelenske joined us and we had a very good 
discussion about moving forward with the creation of the Flint Water Crisis Agency Coordinating 
Committee (FIACC). Tim Becker and Captain Kelenske provided me with a fair amount of input. I also 
read the City of Flint Incident Action Plan for a State of Emergency which Chris received today (enclosed 
for those who wish to read it as well). I have distilled all of this into a two page plan that I want your 
edits and comments on and a one page organizational chart (now presented in the "governor's colors" 
according to our fine people in Communications). Spoiler alert— I made Captain Kelenske Vice Chair of 
the whole shebang (with the Colonel's blessing) so Harvey wouldn't get lonely. 

Here is my ask of you: 

1) Within 24 (sooner if you can) hours give me your comments and input 

2) Tomorrow I will turn around a final document for Jarrod to review with the Governor either 
New Year's Day or Saturday 

3) Ideally, Governor will approve Harvey sending it to Mayor Weaver Saturday (Sunday latest) 

4) Mayor needs to know that this is what the Governor wishes to discuss at the meeting January 7 
along with financial resources that we still need some estimates on cost from DHHS for 

5) Meegan and Dave need to noodle how best to get out front with this and change the narrative 
focus on Monday's Genesee County declaration of emergency 


I know we are all working way too hard for what should be a rest and recharge period but I do 
appreciate everyone's efforts and I know the Boss really does as well. 

Regards, 

Rich 

<A Proposal to Create the Flint Water Inter.docx> 


l 



<IA Coord Com Org Chart.jpg> 
CAP Flint Water 2015-12-29.pdf> 


2 



From: 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Sent: 

Thursday, March 26, 2015 6:31 PM 

To: 

Redford, James (GOV) 

Cc: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Flint water 


Thank you, Jim. We definitely need to explore to see if this is possible. 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Mar 26, 2015, at 5:22 PM, Redford, James (GOV) < Redfordj^nichig3n.gov > wrote: 

Two thoughts after discussions with Valarie: 

• Cost to re-connect Flint to DWS seems higher than they should be. She thinks price estimates 
may be inflated so as to continue to show it was necs to detach from DWS in first place 

• Thinks headway could be made by our DEQ director engaging in process/discussions because 
DSW is in need of a state issued permit for something they would like to/ need to be doing and 
DEQ could ease the process if DSW were to help substantially in Flint FI20 issue 

I do not know whether these observations are as visionary as if proclaimed by The Oracle of Delphi 
herself or if there is no moment at all to the assessments. 

I just pass them on as observations, that if accurate , could lead to us being able to get to a good Flint 
solution on water in place until they are up and running with a new system themselves. 

Jim 

JAMES ROBERT REDFORD 
Legal Counsel 

Executive Office of the Governor 
111 South Capital Avenue 
P.O. Box 30013 
Lansing , Michigan 48909 
517.241.5630 


l 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) 

Thursday, September 03, 2015 5:36 PM 
Redford, James (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 
Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

FW: Flint Water 

Flint Water Ltr 3-3-15.pdf; Flint Water memo 2-ll-15.pdf 


Gentlemen,,, in the attached (which you have likely seen before) is a description of the cost to reconnect to DWSD. i 
assume/hope no one is still seriously considering that option but if you need anything more give us a call. 


l 




TO 


* 


Wayne Workman, Deputy Treasurer 
Treasury Department 



As the Emergency Manager for the City of Flint, I am charged with restoring the City government 
to financial solvency, and working to assure that the City moves forward on a financially 
sustainable basis. The steps taken over the past three years have been difficult Taxes and fees have 
been raised, services and workforce reduced, and. ongoing costs, including legacy costs, have been 
cons trained, 

The current controversy surrounding the provision of water, and the path for resolution, has a 
potentially significant impact on the progress that is being made. I am satisfied that the water 
provided to Flint users today i s within all MDBQ and EPA guidelines, as evidenced by the most 
recent water quality results conducted for MDEQ. We have a continuing commitment to maintain 
water safety and to improve water quality, and have dedicated resources to assure this commitment 
will bo made. 

The oft-repeated suggestion that foe City should return to DWSD, even for a short period of time, 
would, in my judgment, have extremely negative financial consequences to the water system, and 
consequently to the rate payers. By the most conservative estimates, such a move would increase 
costs by at least S! 2 million annually, with that amount achieved only by eliminating virtually all 
'budgeted improvements ha the system. For a system with Unrestricted Assets of only $740,745.,, 
according to the June 30, 2014 audited financial statements, the only recourse within foe City’s 
control would be to increase revenues significantly. And in my judgment that would come from 
raising rates for water by 30% or more . Further, changing foe source of the city’s water would 
not necessarily change any of the aesthetics of the water, including odor and discoloration, since 
those appear to be directly related to the aging pipes and other infrastructure that carry water from 
the treatment facility to our customers,. 


City of Flint ® 1101 S, Saginaw Street * Flat, Michigan 48502 
wwWvCitynflmt.com « (810) 766-7346 ® Fax; (810) 766-7218 



MarchS, 2015 
Page 2 


This direction of discussion also deviates fern, what, is my judgment, should be the focus: How 
can we not only operate and maintain a system to assure the delivery of safe and quality water 
dependably, but significantly reduce the cost of water and sewer to fee users? At an average of 
$149 per month for water and sewer service for a residential user, the cost is extremely high in 
comparison to surrounding areas, as well as most areas across the state, and creates a significant 
financial burden for many users. In my judgment, we should all be concentrating on how to reduce 
rates by 50% or more. Unfortunately, there are no easy or evident answers, and continuation of 
fee status will be an impediment to the sustainable recovery of fee City of Flint It is a conversation 
that 1 expect we will have wife the recently created Water Quality Advisory Committee, 

My reasoning for this conclusion is as follows: 

One of the decisions made in the context of beginning to eliminate deficits and to restore financial 
stability to fee City of Flint was to increase water and sewer rates significantly - fee only choice 
available to financially stabilize a system that as of June 30, 2012, had a deficit of $8,758, 0?il. 
Another was to leave BWB$ for fee KWA because it offered the opportunity to lower future rate 
increases, A third decision was to utilize the Flint River on an interim basis when DWSD 
unilaterally terminated fee City's contract for water purchase. That decision was made because It 
also offered an immediate cost savings opportunity which translated fete fee ability to upgrade the 
Water Treatment Plant without having to seek foancmg. It was a reasonable decision because of 
our experience in using the river in a back-up capacity, including test runs on a quarterly basis for 
several decades, 

Unforfenately, fee switch to the river as a primary source was more challenging than anticipated, 
and the harsh winter of 2013-2014 resulted in much more damage to fee aging water infrastructure 
than in previous years. The result was fee issuance of required notices feat water exceeded 
established guidelines for safety as it could affect certain vulnerable populations, and some users 
of fee system experienced unpleasant odors and discoloration. Some users also appeared to have 
bad some negative reactions to fee new source of water. However, m soon as the test results were 
known, City staff took immediate actions to address the concerns. These actions are evidenced 
today by tbs fact feat MBEQ has certified feat our most recent testing shows water from all testing 
sites to be well within acceptable guidelines. Additionally, fee City is contouring to taking the 
necessary actions to assure feat the water supply remains safe and that water quality continues to 
improve. 


As the City has moved to address the situation, fee suggestion continues to be made feat the City 
should re-engage with DWSD and purchase water at least until the KWA pipeline is supplying 
water. As evidenced by the most recent letter from DWSD, such a decision would immediately 
increase fee City’s cost by $846,700 per month, or $10,160,400 per year, just for fee fixed cost 



March 3, 2015 
Page 3 


the quantity purchased, We estimate the actual water purchase cost to average more than $ 1 million 
per month, for a grand total of approximately $22 minion per year. Finally, the DWSD offer is 
conditioned upon the City (or presumably the KWA) agreeing to negotiate a long term contract 
(30 years} for back-up. 


The $22 million animal estimate of increased costs to purchase water horn DWSD would be 
minimally offset by an approximate. $3 million in reduced operating costs, and could be further 
offset by an additional $9 million, but only if all fending for capital improvements to fee system 
are eliminated. To eliminate all fending dedicated to repairing, stabilizing, and improving the 
system would be totally irresponsible and would have long term negative consequences to fee City 
and to future rate payers. 


As you are aware we have recently brought in outside expert assistance to evaluate the steps we 


implementing those recommendations in a timely manner. Many steps have already been taken, I 
am confident feat implementing their recommendations will assure a continuing supply of safe 
water as well as improved quality, and at tor less cost than re-engaging DWSD. 

We have also created a 4G~member 'Water Advisory Committee and a 13-member Technical 
Advisory Committee to assure two-way communication with the public and users of the system. 
Those committees will begin to meet ids week, aad we look forward to answering their questions 
and receiving their input. 


It is unfortunate that problems and concerns with quality have arisen, and we are working every 
day to address the issues that caused them. Maintaining safe water and improving quality is a top 
priority as we work to make the City of Flint an attractive place to live, work, study, told play. 



n ms*. 


tUCKSNYDBR 

oovamoR 



Stats of Michigan 
DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY 
Lansing 


R. KEVIN CLINTON 
STATS TREASURER 


DATE; February 11,2015 

TO: Tom Saxton, Chief Deputy Treasurer 

FROM; Wayne Workmen, Deputy State Treasurer 

| ^ }6 

SUBJECT: City of Flint Water Rates \j V 





Attached and below is information regarding the increase in water and sewer rates for the City of Flint since 2010. 

« The data shows the significant deficit position of the water fund which was not rectified until 2013 when 
water rates were increased by 26%. The data also shorn the lack of capita! investment for a system as old 
as Flint. 

• This condition is acknowledged in tire City’s recently adopted Capital Improvements Flan which 
Identified approximately $50M in needed capital improvements over the next several years. This 
deficiency was also noted in the rate study commissioned by the City of Flint in 2014. 


» According to the City, if Flint recomiected to DWSD for the next S § months, the e stim a ted monthly cost 
would he more than SIM per month totaling approximately $I8M , This includes a fixed monthly charge 
of $846,700 pins the cost of actual water usage, minus the cost of operational expenditures at the Water 
Treatment Plant, Even with the elimination of future capital improvements, most of the additional coat 
would need to be fended wife m additional increase to existing rates. Such an increase could approach 
30%. 


* The option of purchasing DWSD water from She County would be on parity wife purchasing water 
directly from DWSD. 

<* The KWA previously advised fee City that the connection to KWA may take place in mid-2016, but has 
now stated Shat weath er conditions permitting. She connection could be made as early as December 2015. 

®> The ISM capital costs to upgrade the Water Treatment Plant was made to be able to treat both river water 
and KWA water. Tins upgrade has been funded with the cost reduction in operating costs achieved by 
not buying water from DWSD during the interim period, 

® As you are aware, the City has retained Yeolia as an outside water consultant to assist in maintaining the 
safety and improving lira quality of water produced by its water system, and their initial analysis is due to 
he completed within fee next two weeks. In addition, the City's current budget includes $2M for 
replacement of a 2-mile pipeline segment that is anticipated to significantly address some of fee current 
water issues. 


430 WEST ALLEGAN STREET * LANSING, feSiOHIGAN 4SS22 
www.mteftSsafi.ssv^tmssury * (SI 7 } 373-3SSS 


Average monthly bill in 20 1 5 ~ note diet wafer and sewer are not billed separately; the charges gre Included within 
the ss»e bill regardless of water usage. 


Water service charge $22.90 

Sewer service charge $34.48 

Tots! service charge $57.38 

Per unit rate 

Water $ 7.92 

Sewer g 5.17 

Total per unit $13.09 


Average family of four uses 7 units per month. 

Their bill for usage wstdd be; 7 x 13.09 “91.63 + 57.38 service charge ~ $149. 
If additional Informal ion Is desired, please let ms know. 


^30 WEST ALUE&AN STREET » LANStNQ, ftSlCHSGAN Amzz 
www.f»iciiia®«.86vamis«uni' * (Si?> ars-aaeo 














From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Thursday, September 24, 2015 12:06 PM 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Redford, James 
(GOV) 

Fwd: New ACLU video gets tough with Flint officials over lead levels | Blogs | Detroit 
Metro Times 


Best, 

Harvey 

Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Hollins, Harvey (GOV)" <hollinsh (S !michi ga n. go v> 

Date: September 24, 2015 at 12:03:01 PM EDT 

To: "Murray, David (GOV)" <Murrav D 1 @ m ichl g an . go v> 

Cc: "Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" < Wurfel s@michi uan.gov >, "Clayton, Stacie (GOV)" 

< claytons3 @michi gan. gov >. "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" < muchmored@.michi gan. gov > 

Subject: Re: New ACLU video gets tough with Flint officials over lead levels | Blogs | 
Detroit Metro Times 

Senator Ananich has formed a new coalition to speak on the water issues in Flint. Hurley 
hospital will be a member of that coalition. This coalition may be competitive with the existing 
Clean Water Coalition where a lot of the grassroots types participate. Hurley will also work to 
get more residents water filters, and that may be apart of the announcement today. 


On Sep 24, 2015, at 1 1:37 AM, Murray, David (GOV) <M urra v D 1 @ mi chig a n . go v> wrote: 


Harvey, 


We're hearing from MLive that Hurley Hospital has called a 3 p.m. press 
conference to discuss the lead levels in blood collected from children. I'm 
working to get the report from Hurley ASAP. Working with Geralyn on a 
response. 


Dave 


Original Message 

From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, September 24, 2015 11:36 AM 


l 



To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wurfels @m ichigan. gov> 

Cc: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) <davtons3 @.michi gan. gov >: Murray, David (GOV) 

<Murra y D 1 @michig a n. go v>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

< muc hmored @.m ichi gan. goy > 

Subject: Re: New ACLU video gets tough with Flint officials over lead levels | 
Blogs j Detroit Metro Times 


Sarah— per our discussion yesterday, what is the status of announcing the DEQ 
action to address the water quality in Flint? 


-HH 


On Sep 24, 2015, at 1 1:03 AM, Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

< claytons3 @..michi gan. gov > wrote: 


http://m. metrotimes.com/Blogs/archives/2015/09/23/new--aclu-- 
video-gets-t.ough-vvith-flint-officials-over-lead-lfevfcls 


Stacie Clayton 
Sent from my iPhone 


2 




From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Brader, Valerie (LARA) 

Thursday, October 01, 2015 11:21 AM 
Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Redford, James (GOV) 

RE: ACLU and Flint Water (Correction) 
Michael Steinberg.vcf 


WRONG CELL. Sorry Dan, was copying wrong number of my ceil phone. Here is Mike's contact 


Michael Steinberg 

American Cm! Lshefties Union 

mstei:nberg#3ciumtch,ofg 
60 W. Hancock 
Detroit, MI 48201 
United States of America 



From: Brader, Valerie (LARA) 

Sent: Thursday, October 01, 2015 11:12 AM 
To: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Cc: Redford, James (GOV) 

Subject: ACLU and Flint Water 

Dan - FYI. I used to commute to Detroit with Mike Steinberg, who is head of litigation for the ACLU in Michigan. He just 
called to say they may be getting involved with the Flint case to see if they can force Flint to go back to DWSD. He 
wanted to call and see if I was involved so they could have a conversation before they come in. I said I had no more 
involvement and said he should talk to you - that I would let you know and give him your number. He is pretty straight- 
up in terms of letting you know where they will go and you can trust him if there is a settlement discussion to play it 
straight. That said, he has been with the ACLU for years, so you know where they are likely to be and be able to go. His 
cell number is 

--Valerie 

Valerie J.M. Brader 

Executive Director, Michigan Agency for Energy 
Office: 517-284-8335 

braderv@michigan.gov 




To: Hollins, Harvey (GOV)[hollinsh@michigan.gov]; Clayton, Stacie 

(GOV)[claytons3@michigan.gov]; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)[muchmored@michigan.gov]; Clement, Elizabeth 
(GOV)[clemente@michigan.gov]; Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV)[wisniewskiw@michigan.gov] 

Required Attendees: Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Clayton, Stacie (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); 

Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Optional Attendees: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Location: Governor's SE Ml Office 

Importance: Normal 

Subject: RDS - Urban Initiatives Update 

Start Date/Time: Mon 9/21/2015 6:00:00 PM 

End Date/Time: Mon 9/21/2015 6:30:00 PM 

Recurrence Pattern: None 

Agenda: 



IV. Flint Water 





From: Stoken, Laura (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, November 16, 2015 9:03 AM 

To: Redford, James (GOV) 

Cc: Thomet, Ruth (GOV) 

Subject: FW: Safe Drinking Water Act Notice of Intent to Sue 

Attachments: 2015-11-16-SDWA-Notice of Intent to Sue-Flint-FINAL.PDF 

Importance: High 


Good morning sir, 

Please see below (attached) correspondence that came into the Governor's public facing e-mail box. i am forwarding 
onto you for action determination. 

Please let me know if I am sending it you by mistake. 

Thanks, 

Laura 


From: Chaudhary, DimpleHHHHHHHHHHHHV 
Sent: Monday, November 16, 2015 9:00 AM 
To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

Subject: Safe Drinking Water Act Notice of Intent to Sue 
Dear Governor Snyder, 

Attached please find a Notice of Intent to sue under the federal Safe Drinking Water Act for failure to control lead in 
drinking water in Flint, Michigan, and failure to assist Michigan schools with lead testing and remediation. We have also 
sent you the Notice and a CD of exhibits today by certified mail, return receipt requested. 

Best regards, 


l 


Dimple Chaudhary 


Dimple Chaudhary, Senior Attorney* 

Natural Resources Defense Council 

1152 15th Street NW, Suite 300, Washington, DC 20005 

Tel. 202.289.2385 | 

*admitted in the District of Columbia and New York 
PRIVILEGE AND CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE 

This message is intended only for the addressee and may contain information that is privileged, confidential, and exempt from disclosure under law. If you are not the 
intended recipient, please notify me immediately by email and delete the original message. 


2 


November 16, 2015 


By Certified Mail, Return Receipt Requested 

City of Flint 

Attn: Mayor Karen Williams Weaver 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
may or@city offlint . co m 

Governor Rick Snyder 
P.O.Box 30013 
Lansing, MI 48909 
contactmichigan@state. mi.us 

Director Dan Wyant 

Michigan Department of Environmental 

Quality 

Constitution Hall 
525 West Allegan Street 
P.O. Box 30473 
Lansing, MI 48909-7973 
WyantD@michigan.gov 

Treasurer Nick A. Khouri 
Michigan Department of Treasury 
Richard H. Austin Building 
430 West Allegan Street 
Lansing, MI 48922 
KhouriN @michigan. gov 

RTAB Chairperson Frederick Headen 
Flint City Hall 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
HeadenF@michigan. gov 


RTAB Member Brian Larkin 
Flint City Hall 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
blarkin@flintandgenessee.org 

RTAB Member David McGhee 
Flint City Hall 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
drmcghee@skillman. org 

RTAB Member Robert McMahan 
Flint City Hall 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
president@kettering. edu 

RTAB Member Beverly Walker-Griffea 

Flint City Hall 

1101 South Saginaw Street 

Flint, MI 48502 

b . walkergriffea@mcc .edu 

City Administrator Natasha Henderson 

Flint City Hall 

1101 South Saginaw Street 

Flint, MI 48502 

nhenderson@cityofflint.com 


Re: Notice of Intent to Sue Under the Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. 

§ 300j-8(b)(l)(a), for Failure to Control Lead in Drinking Water in Flint, 
Michigan, and Failure to Assist Michigan Schools with Lead Testing and 
Remediation 

We write on behalf of Concerned Pastors for Social Action, Melissa Mays, the 
American Civil Liberties Union of Michigan (ACLU of Michigan), and the Natural 



November 16, 2015 
Page 2 of 16 

Resources Defense Council (NRDC), nonprofit citizens’ organizations and individuals 
working to secure safe drinking water for the residents of Flint, Michigan. Since April 2014, 
the City of Flint and Michigan state officials have failed to monitor and control for lead in 
Flint’s drinking water, and to maintain a program to assist Michigan schools with lead 
testing and remediation, in violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. § 300f et 
seq. This letter provides notice pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 300j-8(b)(l)(a) that we intend to sue 
the City of Flint; Rick Snyder, Governor of Michigan; Dan Wyant, Director of Michigan 
Department of Environmental Quality; Nick A. Khouri, Treasurer of Michigan; Frederick 
Headen, Chairperson of the Flint Receivership Transition Advisory Board (Board); Brian 
Tarkin, David McGhee, Robert McMahan, and Beverly Walker-Griffea, Members, RTAB; 
and Natasha Henderson, Flint City Administrator, if these violations are not remedied 
within sixty days. 1 

Concerned Pastors for Social Action is an association of religious leaders from more 
than thirty churches and ministries in the Flint area that has advocated for the rights of the 
underserved for nearly fifty years. Melissa Mays is a Flint resident whose family has 
suffered from serious health problems as a result of the City’s failure to provide safe drinking 
water. The ACTU of Michigan works in courts, legislatures, and communities to preserve 
the protections that our laws guarantee to all citizens. NRDC is a national membership 
organization committed to protecting public health and the environment and to reducing 
the exposure of all communities to toxic chemicals. These groups and individuals continue 
to be harmed by the violations of the Safe Drinking Water Act by the City and Michigan 
state officials, detailed below. 

I. City and State officials have exposed and continue to expose Flint residents to 

dangerous amounts of lead in drinking water 

A. The City, Emergency Manager, and State Treasurer chose the Flint River 
as a primary drinking-water source 

In the fall of 20 1 1 , Michigan Governor Rick Snyder declared a financial emergency 
in the City of Flint and appointed an emergency manager to take control of the City’s 
operations and finances. 2 Flint Mayor Dayne Walling and the City Council were stripped of 
all authority except as specifically allowed by the Emergency Manager, and the City was 
placed in state receivership. 3 Under Michigan’s Focal Financial Stability and Choice Act, an 


1 These individuals are noticed in their official capacities. 

2 See Mich. Comp. Laws § 141.1549; Letter from Gov. Rick Snyder to Mayor Dayne Walling 
and Flint City Council (Nov. 8, 2011), http : / /www. michisan . gov/documents/freasurv/Flint- 
GovernorsDetermination-11-8-11 417435 7.pdf (attached as Ex. 1); Dawson Bell, Governor names 
Flint native as city ’s emergency financial manager, DetroitFree Press, Nov. 30, 2011, http: / / www.freep. 
com/article/201 1 1 130/NEWS06/ 1 1 1300370/Govemor-names-Flint-native-citv-s-emergencv- 
financial-manager (attached as Ex. 2). 

3 Mich. Comp. Laws § 141.1549(2). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 3 of 16 

Emergency Manager has “broad powers” to “rectify the financial emergency and to assure 
fiscal accountability of the local government.” 4 

While under control of the Emergency Manager, the City faced decisions about the 
future of its drinking-water supply. For fifty years, the City had purchased drinking water 
from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (Detroit), which sources water from 
Lake Efuron. 5 In response to rising water rates charged by Detroit, in March 2013, the City 
Council voted to join the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA), a newly formed municipal 
water supply system. The KWA was planning to build a pipeline to distribute water directly 
from Lake Huron to mid-Michigan communities, including Genesee County, where Flint is 
located. 6 The City Council’s vote did not become effective until several weeks later, after 
both the Emergency Manager and State Treasurer approved the decision. 7 

The City’s contract with Detroit was set to expire in April 2014, at least eighteen 
months before the KWA pipeline was scheduled to be completed. 8 Faced with a year-and-a- 
half gap in the City’s water supply, the Emergency Manager declined to negotiate a short- 
term contract with Detroit and decided instead to use the Flint River as a primary drinking- 
water source. 9 The City had previously explored — and rejected — the Flint River as a 
primary drinking-water source. This is because the Flint Water Treatment Plant would have 
required fifty million dollars in upgrades to treat the river water and “produce finished water 
in conformance with the current federal and state drinking water regulations.” 10 


4 Id. 

5 See Dominic Adams, Closing the valve on history: Flint cuts water flow from Detroit after nearly 50 
years , Michigan Live, Apr. 25, 2014, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2014/04/closing 

the valve on history f.html (attached as Ex. 3). 

6 Steve Carmody, Flint opting to get its future tap water from Lake Huron , Michigan Radio, Mar. 25, 
2013, http: / /michiganradio . or g/post/ flint-op tin g- get-its-future-tap-water-lake-huron#stream/ 
(attached as Ex. 4); Karegnondi Water Authority, About, http://wsvw.karegnondi.eom/#labout/c2 
0r9 (last visited Nov. 13, 2015) (attached as Ex. 5). 

7 -See Mich. Comp. Laws § 141 . 1552(l)(g), (3); Emergency Manager, Resolution to Purchase 
Capacity from Karegnondi Water Authority (adopted Mar. 29, 2013) (attached as Ex. 6); Letter 
from Andy Dillon, State Treasurer, to Edward Kurtz, Emergency Manager (Apr. 11, 2013) 
(authorizing Emergency Manager to enter into contract with KWA) (attached as Ex. 7). 

8 Sarah Schuch, KWA pipeline work continues as Flint water lead concerns rise, Michigan Live, Sept. 
25, 2015, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/09/kwa pipeline projected to be c. 
html (attached as Ex. 8); see Ron Fonger, Detroit gives notice: It’s terminating water contract covering Flint, 
Genesee County in one year, Michigan Live, Apr. 19, 2013, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index. 
ssf/2013/04/detroit gives notice its termi.html (attached as Ex. 9). 

9 Letter from Darnell Earley, Emergency Manager, to Sue McCormick, Detroit Water & Sewer 
Dep’t (Mar. 7, 2014) (explaining that the City “has actively pursued using the Flint River as a 
temporary water source” instead of accepting Detroit’s offer to provide water to the City) (attached 
as Ex. 10). 

10 Cost of Service Study (2011), Appendix 8 to Analysis of the Flint River as a Permanent Water 
Supply for the City of Flint, http://www.scribd.com/doc/64382 1 8 1 /Analvsis-of-the-Flint-River-as- 
a-Permanent-Water-Supplv-for-the-Citv-of-Flint-Julv-2011-Appendices-l-to-8 (attached as Ex. 11); 



November 16, 2015 
Page 4 of 16 


Under the Safe Drinking Water Act’s Lead and Copper Rule, Flint’s water system 
could not use the Flint River as a water source without first obtaining approval from the 
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). The Lead and Copper Rule 
required MDEQ to approve both the City’s proposed addition of a new water source (the 
Flint River) and the long-term change in water treatment (from treatment through Detroit’s 
water plant to treatment at the Flint Water Treatment Plant). 11 In April 2014, MDEQ 
approved the switch to river water. 12 The City immediately began pumping Flint River 
water through the City’s distribution pipes and into residents’ taps. 

B. Dangerous lead contamination results from the City's switch to river water 

In the twenty months following the switch in water sources, residents’ drinking water 
has been at times cloudy, discolored, and foul-smelling. 13 Residents reported that they have 
experienced hair loss, skin rashes, and vomiting after drinking the water. 14 In the summer of 
2014, the City was forced to issue several boil-water notices after tap water tested positive 
for total coliform bacteria. 15 The City’s subsequent treatment of the water to kill disease- 
carrying pathogens resulted in elevated levels of total trihalo methanes, a disinfection 
byproduct that can cause serious health problems, including an increased risk of cancer. 16 


see also Kristin Longley, Water pipeline v. Flint River: City of Flint studying its drinking water options , 
Michigan Live, Jan. 22, 2011, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2011/01/water pipelin 
e vs flint river.html (attached as Ex. 12); Dominic Adams, Flint River now an option for drinking water 
following Detroit’s termination of contract, Michigan Live, July 23, 2013, http://www.mlive.com/news 
/flint/index.ssf/2013/07/citv readying water plant to t.html (quoting city officials’ explanation 
for rejecting use of Flint River: “upgrades to Flint’s water plant would be too expensive, the river 
didn’t provide enough capacity to serve Flint residents’ water needs and the Michigan Department 
of Environmental Quality would not allow it”) (attached as Ex. 13). 

11 40 C.F.R. § 141.90(a)(3); see also id. § 141.81(a)-(b). 

12 See Adams, Closing the valve on history, supra note 5 (Ex. 3). 

13 See Curt Guyette, In Flint, Michigan, Overpriced Water is Causing People’s Skin to Erupt in Rashes 
and Hair to Fall Out, The Nation, July 16, 2015, http://www.thenation.com/article/in-flint- 
michigan-overpriced-water-is-causing-peoples-skin-to-erupt-and-hair-to-fall-out/ (attached as Ex. 

14); Wenonah Hauter, Flint’s Brown Water Blues, Huffington Post, July 10, 2015, http: //www.huffin 
gtonpost.com/wenonah-hauter/flints-brown-water-blues b 7765132.html (attached as Ex. 15). 

14 Laura Gottesdiener, Flint, Mich., residents find state water control hard to swallow, A1 Jazeera 
America, Apr. 3, 2015, http://america. aliazeera.com/ar tides/2015/4/3/flint-residents-find-state- 
water-contr ol-har d-to-swallo w . html (attached as Ex. 16). 

15 Ron Fonger, Flint issues boil water advisory for section of the city after positive test result for total 
coliform bacteria, Michigan Live, Sept. 5, 2014, http://www.mlive.eom/news/flint/index.ssf/2014/0 
9 /flint issues boil water adviso.html (attached as Ex. 17). 

16 Robin Erb, Who wants to drink Flint’s water?, Detroit Free Press, Jan. 23, 2015, http:/ /www.free 
p.com/storv/news/local/michigan/20 15/01 /22/water-woes-latest-hit-flint/22 19329 1 / (attached as 
Ex. 18); Mich. Dep’t ofEnvtl. Quality, Violation Notice — Maximum Contaminant Level for Total 
Trihalomethanes (Dec. 16, 2014) (attached as Ex. 19); U.S. EPA, Basic Information about 
Disinfection Byproducts in Drinking Water, http://water.epa.gov/dilnk/contaminants/basicinform 




November 16, 2015 
Page 5 of 16 


Because Flint River water is also highly corrosive, dangerous amounts of lead began 
to leach out of pipes and into the City’s drinking water. 17 Lead in drinking water occurs 
primarily from corrosion of pipes and other plumbing materials that contain lead or lead 
solder. 18 The Lead and Copper Rule requires water systems to manage lead levels by 
controlling corrosion, which is often accomplished by adding corrosion-inhibiting 
chemicals. 19 Water systems must implement and maintain an “optimal” corrosion-control 
treatment program that “minimizes the lead . . . concentrations at users’ taps.” 20 

Flint did not consider how to control the corrosivity of the river water before 
switching water sources, nor did MDEQ require the City to implement any corrosion- 
control measures. Rather, beginning in April 2014, the City did not use any form of 
treatment to control corrosion. 21 The City waited until after its residents were drinking the 
river water to assess whether it posed a risk of increased lead exposure. MDEQ endorsed 
this approach. In June 2014, Flint’s water system initiated the first of two six-month 
monitoring periods to test tap water for lead under the Lead and Copper Rule; the second 
six-month period ran from January to June 2015. 22 During these monitoring periods, the 
water system used flawed testing methods that appear to have been designed to underreport 
the lead content of residents’ drinking water. 23 


ation/disinfectionbvproducts.cfm (last updated Dec. 13, 2013) (attached as Ex. 20); see also 40 
C.F.R. § 141.64(b). 

17 Marc Edwards, Test Update: Flint River water 19X more corrosive than Detroit water for Lead Solder; 
Now What?, Flint Water Study (Sept. 11, 2015), http://flintwaterstudv.org/2015/09/test-update- 
flint-river-water-19x-more-corrosive-than-detroit-water-for-lead-solder-now-what/ (attached as Ex. 
21); Marc Edwards, Flint River water is very corrosive to lead, and causing lead contamination in homes, 
Flint Water Study (Sept. 2, 2015), http : / / flintwater stu dv.org/2015/Q9 / flint-river s-water-is-verv- 
corrosive-to-lead-and-causing-lead-contamination-in-homes/ (attached as Ex. 22). The river water is 
so corrosive that in October 2014, a local GM engine plant decided to switch back to Lake Huron 
water to avoid damage to equipment at the plant from corrosion. Brianna Owczarzak, GM says no to 
Flintwater, WNEM, Oct. 14, 2014, http://www.wnem.com/storv/26785625/gm-savs-no-to-flint- 
water (attached as Ex. 23). 

18 See Maximum Contaminant Level Goals and National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
for Lead and Copper, 56 Fed. Reg. 26,460, 26,464 (June 7, 1991). 

19 See 40 C.F.R. § 141.82. 

20 Id. §§ 141.2; 141.80(d). 

21 See Email from Pat Cook, MDEQ, to Miguel Del Toral, U.S. EPA (Apr. 24, 2015) (attached 
as Ex. 24). 

22 See 40 C.F.R. § 141.86; Email from Pat Cook, supra note 21 (Ex. 24). 

23 See infra pp. 11-13. 



November 16, 2015 
Page 6 of 16 

Flint’s monitoring data showed that some residents’ water contained lead at 
concentrations above the federal “action level” of 15 parts per billion (ppb). 24 These high 
lead levels put residents at risk of abroad array of serious, irreversible health effects, 
including cognitive impairment, kidney damage, and increased blood pressure. 25 When the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) learned of these high lead sampling results in 
February 2015, it notified MDEQ officials that the sampling results raised significant 
concerns about corrosion from lead pipes in Flint’s distribution system. 26 Nonetheless, 
throughout the monitoring periods, the City and MDEQ maintained that these high lead 
levels were isolated and that the data, taken together, demonstrated Flint’s compliance with 
the Lead and Copper Rule. 27 

C. Community advocacy and independent testing prompt long past due 
response from City and State officials 

As the City concluded its second six-month round of sampling in July 2015, and 
notified some Flint residents of elevated lead levels in their tap water, the community 
became increasingly concerned. A small coalition of local groups, including Water You 
Fighting For and Concerned Pastors for Social Action, began working with researchers at 
Virginia Tech to conduct their own lead sampling of Flint’s water. The Virginia Tech 
scientists found that ten percent of the more than 250 samples collected from Flint 
residences had lead levels of 25 ppb or more, well above the federal action level for lead. 28 
Several samples exceeded 100 ppb, and one sample exceeded 1000 ppb. 29 Though aware of 


24 See Mich. Dep’t of Envtl Quality, Lead and Copper Report and Consumer Notice of Lead 
Result Certificate for Community Water Supply (Aug. 20, 2015) (showing six samples with lead 
levels over the action level) (attached as Ex. 25); 40 C.F.R. § 141.80(c)(1). 

25 See, e.g., U.S. EPA, Integrated Science Assessment for Lead tbl.ES-1 (June 2013) (attached as 
Ex. 26); U.S. EPA, Basic Information About Lead in Drinking Water, htt p://water.epa. gov/drink/ 
contaminants/basicinformation/lead.cfm (last updated June 26, 2015) (explaining that “[i]nfants 
and children who drink water containing lead in excess of the action level could experience delays in 
their physical or mental development,” and that “[ajdults who drink this water over many years 
could develop kidney problems or high blood pressure”) (attached as Ex. 27); see also National 
Ambient Air Quality Standards for Lead, 80 Fed. Reg. 278, 290 (Jan. 5, 2015). 

26 See, e.g., Email from Jennifer Crooks, U.S. EPA, to Stephen Busch, MDEQ, and Mike Prysby, 
MDEQ (Feb. 26, 2015) (attached as Ex. 28). 

27 See Nancy Kaffer, MDEQ e-mails show stunning indifference to Flint peril, Detroit Free Press, Oct. 
22, 2015, http://www.freep.com/storv/opinion/columnists/nancv-kaffer/2015/10/21/indifference 
-characterized-state-approach-flint-water/74289430/ (attached as Ex. 29). 

28 Flint Town Hall Meeting Presentation and Distribution of lead results across Flint by ward and zip codes, 
Flint Water Study, Sept. 16, 2015, http : //flintwater study. org/20 1 5/09 /distribution-of-lead-results- 
across-flint-bv-ward-and-zip-codes/ (attached as Ex. 30); Ron Fonger, Virginia Tech professor says 
Flint’s tests for lead in water can’t be trusted, Michigan Live, Sept. 15, 2015, http:/ /www.mlive.com/ne 
ws/flint/index.ssf/2015/09/virginia tech researcher savs.html (attached as Ex. 31). 

29 Marc Edwards et al., Lead testing results for water sampled by residents, Flint Water Sffidy, Sept. 

28, 2015, http://flintwaterstudv.org/information-for-flint-residents/results-for-citizen-testing-for- 
lead-300-kits/ (attached as Ex. 32). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 7 of 16 

the Virginia Tech sampling results, MDEQ officials continued to insist that Flint’s water 
was safe to drink. 30 

In September 2015, a medical study conducted by a local pediatrician confirmed the 
kinds of adverse health impacts that residents had voiced concern about for months: the rate 
of Flint children with elevated blood lead levels had nearly doubled since the City changed 
its drinking-water source. 31 State officials and the Governor reacted by “downplaying] and 
in some cases attempting] to discredit” the pediatrician’s findings, and dismissing citizen 
concerns as “near-hysteri[cal].” 32 

Subsequent testing by MDEQ revealed that at least four schools in Flint had lead 
levels in their drinking water above the federal action level. 33 At Freeman Elementary 
School, water tested had lead levels over 100 ppb, more than six times the federal action 
level. 34 This increase in lead exposure is particularly dangerous in Flint, a community where 
residents are already at higher risk of elevated blood lead levels and lead poisoning. 
Michigan ranks fifth worst in the country for harmful exposures to lead. 35 Tow income is a 
risk factor for lead poisoning, and more than a third of families in Flint live below the 
poverty level, three times the national average. 36 Children in Flint also face high risk of lead 


30 Ron Fonger, Feds sending in experts to help Flint keep lead out of water, Michigan Live, Sept. 10, 
2015, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/09/universitv researchers dont dr.html 
(attached as Ex. 33). 

31 Pediatric Lead Exposure in Flint, MI: Concerns from the Medical Community (PowerPoint 
Presentation) (presented on Sept. 24, 2015), available at http://flintwaterstudv.org/2015/09/pediatri 
c-lead-exposure-presentation-from-hurlev-medical-center-doctors-concerning-flint-mi/ (attached as 
Ex. 34). 

32 Study suggests Flint’s water causing increased lead poisoning, Michigan Radio, Sept. 28, 2015, 
http://michiganradio.org/post/studv-suggests-flints-water-causing-increased-lead- 
poisoning#stream/Q (attached as Ex. 35); Ron Fonger, State says data shows no link to Flint River, 
elevated lead in blood, Michigan Live, Sept. 24, 2015, http://www.mlive.eom/news/flint/index.ssf/2 
015/09/state savs its data shows no c.html (attached as Ex. 36); Did this Michigan Town Poison its 
Children?, U.S. News & World Report, Sept. 24, 2015, http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/201 
5/09/25/flint-michigan-children-show-high-levels-of-lead-in-blood (attached as Ex. 37). 

33 Steve Carmody, Four Flint schools have high lead levels in their water, Michigan Radio, Oct. 8, 
2015, http://michiganradio.or g/post/four-fhnt-schools-have-high-lead-levels-their-water (attached 
as Ex. 38). 

34 Id. 

35 Ctrs. for Disease Control & Prevention, Public Health in Action: Lead Poisoning Prevention in 
Michigan (last updated Feb. 4, 2013), http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/information/healthv homes lead. 
htm (attached as Ex. 39). 

36 2009-2013 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates, 2013, available at http : / /factfinder. 
census.gov/faces/nav/isf/pages/index.xhtml (enter “Flint, MI” in the box under “Community 
Facts,” click on “Income” on left-side bar, then click “Selected Economic Characteristics” under 
“2013 American Community Survey”) (table attached as Ex. 40 compares data from Flint, 
Michigan, to Michigan and the United States). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 8 of 16 

exposure from lead-paint dust, as nearly ninety percent of Flint’s housing stock was built 
before 1978 (when the federal ban on high-lead paint went into effect). 37 

Finally, in late September 2015, the City abandoned its assertions that Flint’s 
drinking water was safe. Nearly seven months after the City first saw dangerously high 
levels of lead in some residents’ water, Flint issued a drinking-water advisory and called for 
state financial assistance to switch the water system back to Detroit’s supply. 38 Two weeks 
later, Governor Snyder requested six million dollars from the state legislature to reconnect 
the Flint water system to Detroit. 39 With additional funding from the City and a private 
foundation, the switch was completed in mid-October. 40 

Following the switch back to Detroit water, some government officials began to ask 
questions about what went wrong in the course of Flint’s change in water sources. 41 
Governor Snyder created a task force to review water management and testing in Flint, 42 
and EPA established its own task force “to provide the Agency’s technical expertise through 
regular conversations” with the City and MDEQ. 43 Governor Snyder has also announced 


37 2012 Annual Data Report on Blood Lead Levels of Children in Michigan 26 (Apr. 30, 2013), 
https://www.michigan.gov/documents/mdch/2012AnnualDataReportOnBloodLeadLevels 41950 
8 7.pdf (attached as Ex. 41); Am. Cancer Soc’y, Lead, Lead in the Environment, http://www.cancer.o 
rg/cancer/cancercauses/othercarcinogens/athome/lead (last updated May 27, 2014) (explaining 
that lead paint is a “major” source of exposure) (attached as Ex. 42); Maj. Thomas F. Zimmerman, 
The Regulation of Lead-Based Paint in Air Force Housing, 44 A.F. L. Rev. 169, 174-75 (1998). 

38 City of Flint Issues Lead Advisory , City of Flint, Sept. 25, 2015, https://www.citvofflint.com/201 
5/09/25/citv-of-flint-issues-lead-advisorv/ (attached as Ex. 43); Steve Carmody, Flint officials 
exploring return to Detroit water, Michigan Radio, Sept. 28, 2015, http : / /michiganradio .or g/post/flint- 
officials-exploring-return-detroit-water#stream/Q (attached as Ex. 44). 

39 John Wisely, Snyder announces $12 million plan to fix Flint water , Detroit Free Press, Oct. 8, 

2015, http://www.freep.com/storv/news/local/michigan/2015/10/08/snvder-flint-watei'- 
reconnect/ 73567778/ (attached as Ex. 45). 

40 Amanda Emery, Flint reconnects to Detroit water, may take 3 weeks to clear all pipes, Michigan Live, 
Oct. 16, 2015, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/10/flint reconnecting to detroit 
■html (attached as Ex. 46). 

41 E.g., Letter from Sen. Jim Ananich, Mich. Senate Minority Leader, to Susan Hedman, U.S. 
EPA, and Gina McCarthy, U.S. EPA (Oct. 21, 2015) (attached as Ex. 47); Letter from Rep. Daniel 
Kildee, U.S. Congressman, to Gina McCarthy, U.S. EPA (Oct. 21, 2015) (attached as Ex. 48). 

42 Press Release, Gov. Rick Snyder, Gov. Rick Snyder announces Flint Water Task Force to review 
state, federal and municipal actions, offer recommendations (Oct. 21, 2015), http : / / www . michigan . gov / sn 
vder/0.4668. 7-277-57577 57657-367761-.00.html (attached as Ex. 49). 

43 Press Release, U.S. EPA, EPA Establishes Safe Drinking Water Task Force to Provide Technical 
Expertise to MDEQ and City of Flint (Oct. 16, 2015), http://vosemite.epa.gOv/opa/admpress.nsf/0/A 
92DE629DB86E66685257EE000579593 ( attached as Ex. 50k 




November 16, 2015 
Page 9 of 16 

plans to launch an “education campaign soon to help schools statewide learn how to get 
their water tested” for lead. 44 

Despite this proliferation of task forces and campaigns, neither the City nor MDEQ 
has announced changes in the City’s lead monitoring practices in the wake of Flint’s public- 
health crisis. Rather, Flint and MDEQ have maintained that these practices are accurate 
and adequate, despite the near certainty that they are underrepresenting lead contamination 
in many of Flint’s high-risk homes. 

II. City and State officials are in violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act's Lead 

and Copper Rule 

The Safe Drinking Water Act (the Act) authorizes citizens to sue any governmental 
entity “who is alleged to be in violation of any requirement” under the statute. 45 These 
requirements include the national primary drinking-water regulations for lead and copper 
set forth in the Dead and Copper Rule. 46 The Lead and Copper Rule obligates water systems 
to monitor and control for lead in drinking water. 47 

Since April 2014, Flint’s water system has failed to comply with the Lead and 
Copper Rule’s requirements for monitoring water for lead, notifying the public of tap-water 
monitoring results, reporting monitoring results to MDEQ, and controlling corrosion from 
lead pipes. 48 These violations systematically result in the City’s underestimating lead levels 
in its drinking water, masking a public-health crisis. The violations are ongoing and likely to 
recur in the future: Flint’s water system presently is obligated to monitor for lead every six 
months, and there is no indication that Flint has changed or disavowed its inadequate 
approach to monitoring. 49 


44 See Lori Higgins, Michigan to launch lead education effort statewide, Detroit Free Press, Oct. 13, 
2015, http://www.freep.com/storv/news/local/michigan/2015/10/13/lead-water-flint-michigan- 
testing/73871480/ (attached as Ex. 51). 

45 42 U.S.C. § 300j-8(a)(l). 

46 See id. § 300g-l(b)(l)(A); 40 C.F.R. § 141.80(a)(1). 

47 See, e.g., 40 C.F.R. § 141.86. 

48 Flint’s water system is subject to the requirements of the Lead and Copper Rule because it is a 
“community water system” not otherwise exempted from the regulations. 40 C.F.R. §§ 141.80(a)(1), 
141.2. 

49 See Tamaska v. City of Bluff City, 26 F. App’x 482, 485 (6th Cir. 2002) (citing Chesapeake Bay 
Found, v. Gwaltney of Smithfield, 844 F.2d 170, 171-72 (4th Cir. 1988)). A water system is required to 
monitor tap water for lead every six months if it (1) exceeds the action level for any monitoring 
period, or (2) “fails to operate at or above the minimum value or within tire range of values for tire 
water quality parameters specified by the State ... for more than 9 days in any six-month period.” 40 
C.F.R. § 141.86(d)(4)(vi)(B). Flint’s water system failed to maintain applicable values of 
orthophosphate and/or pH designated as the optimal water quality parameters by MDEQ. In 
addition, had the water system conducted monitoring in compliance with the Lead and Copper Rule 
during the January to June 2015 period, it likely would have exceeded the lead action level. 



November 16, 2015 
Page 10 of 16 


Under the Act, a “supplier of water” is “any person who owns or operates a public 
water system.” 50 The City of Flint owns Flint’s water system. 51 Upon information and belief, 
the State officials administering Flint’s receivership and the City presently operate Flint’s 
water system. As discussed above, Flint’s Emergency Manager exercised the authority of 
the local government in the place of Flint’s mayor and city council. The Emergency 
Manager managed the water system and conducted its affairs, including making the 
decision to use the Flint River as a primary drinking-water source. 52 In April 2015, 

Governor Snyder removed the Emergency Manager and appointed a Receivership 
Transition Advisory Board to oversee the City’s affairs until the receivership is terminated. 53 
The Board has control over the City’s budget, and must approve all decisions adopted by the 
City Council. 54 The Michigan Focal Financial Stability and Choice Act requires the State 
Treasurer to sit on a receivership transition advisory board for any municipality for which 
the governor appoints such a board, and Governor Snyder has appointed the State Treasurer 
(or his designee) to chair Flint’s Board. 55 The City Administrator reports to the Board, 
manages the City’s daily administrative operations, and directs City department heads in 
carrying out the daily activities of the City. 56 To date, the City remains in receivership, and 
its actions remain subject to approval of the Board. 57 

Accordingly, the City of Flint; Governor Snyder; Dan Wyant, Director of MDEQ; 
Nick A. Khouri, Treasurer of Michigan; Frederick Headen, Chairperson of the Flint 
Receivership Transition Advisory Board; Brian Tarkin, David McGhee, Robert McMahan, 


50 42 U.S.C. § 300f(5). 

51 See City of Flint, Water System Update, Sept. 2015, https://www.citvofflint.com/wp- 
content/uploads/Citv-Council-Water-Presentation-9- 1 4-20 1 5.pdf (attached as Ex. 52). 

52 See United States v. Twp. of Brighton, 153 F.3d307, 314 (6th Cir. 1998) (defining “operator” for 
purposes of CERCLA as an entity that “performed some affirmative acts,” such as “directing the 
workings, managing, or conducting the affairs” of a facility) (internal quotation marks and 
alterations omitted); cf United States v. Alisal Water Corp., 1 14 F. Supp. 2d 927, 938 (N.D. Cal. 2000) 
(applying case law discussing CERCLA “operator” liability to the Safe Drinking Water Act 
context). 

53 Mich. Comp. Laws § 141.1563(1); Press Release, Gov. Rick Snyder, Gov. Rick Snyder: City of 
Flint ready to move forward as financial emergency resolved, Apr. 29, 2015, htt p://www.michigan.gov/ sn 
vder/0.4668.7-277-57577 57657-353433-.00.html (attached as Ex. 53); Emergency Manager Order 
20 Ifll 4.a.6, 4.a.7 (adopted Apr. 25, 2015), https://www.citvofflint.com/wp-content/uploads/Order 
-No.-20.pdf (attached as Ex. 54). 

54 Emergency Manager Order 20 4. a. 6, 4.a.7, supra note 53 (Ex. 54). 

55 S<?<? Mich. Comp. Laws § 141.1563(2); Letter from Gov. Rick Snyder to Hon. Ruth Johnson, 
Mich. Sec’y of State (Apr. 29, 2015), http://michigan.gov/documents/freasuiv/Flint RTAB Appo 
intments 488251 7.pdf (attached as Ex. 55). 

56 Emergency Manager Order 3 4-6, 25 (adopted Apr. 10, 2015), https://www.citvofflint.com 

/wp-content/uploads/Order-N o .-3 .pdf (attached as Ex. 56). The City Administrator was appointed 
by the Emergency Manager and can be removed only with the Board’s consent. 

57 Id. 



November 16, 2015 
Page 11 of 16 

and Beverly Walker-Griffea, Members of the Board; and Natasha Henderson, Flint City 
Administrator, are responsible for the violations of the Act by Flint’s water system which 
have endangered and will continue to endanger the health of Flint’s residents. 

A. Flint's water system is in violation of the Lead and Copper Rule's tap- 
water monitoring, reporting, and notification requirements 

The Lead and Copper Rule requires water systems to identify a pool of sampling 
sites prior to the commencement of a monitoring period. 58 This requirement is designed to 
target residences at high risk of lead contamination in drinking water, such as homes served 
by lead service lines. 59 In violation of the Rule, Flint’s water system does not select sampling 
sites for lead monitoring based on a pre-established sampling pool. For Flint’s most recent 
completed monitoring period, January- June 2015, the Director of the City’s Department of 
Public Works admitted that Flint “thr[ew] bottles out everywhere just to collect as many 
[samples] as we can, to try and hit our number.” 60 Similarly, email correspondence shows 
that the City has, during several monitoring periods, asked its own employees to submit tap- 
water samples, without regard to whether the employees were part of a pre-selected 
sampling pool. 61 

Under the Lead and Copper Rule, water systems that contain lead service lines also 
must draw fifty percent of their tap-water samples from sites served by a lead service line. 62 
Flint’s water system does not comply with this requirement. The water system reported to 
MDEQ that all the sample sites it used during the January-June 2015 monitoring period 
were residences served by lead service lines. 63 Flint’s Utilities Administrator, however, 
admitted that he was not able to verify that all homes sampled were served by lead service 
lines. 64 This is because City records concerning the locations of lead service lines in the 
distribution system are stored on 45,000 paper notecards. Flint began converting these 
notecards into an electronic spreadsheet this fall, well after the January-June 2015 
monitoring period. 65 


58 See 40 C.F.R. § 141.86(a). 

59 Id. 

60 See ACLU of Michigan, Thirst for Truth: Who’s to Blame for Flint Water Crisis ?, https://www.vo 
utube.com/watch?t=9&v=LTQ9irD2fOY (posted Sept. 23, 2015). 

61 Email from Michael Glasgow, Flint Utilities Adm’r, to Flint municipal staff (June 1, 2015) 
(attached as Ex. 57). 

62 40 C.F.R. § 141.86(a)(8). 

63 See, e.g., City of Flint, Lead and Copper Report and Consumer Notice of Lead Result 
Certificate for Community Water Supply (July 28, 2015) [hereinafter Jufy 28 Report] (attached as 
Ex. 58). 

64 See ACLU of Michigan, Thirst for Truth: Who’s to Blame for Flint Water Crisis?, supra note 60. 

65 See Ron Fonger, Flint data on lead water lines stored on 45,000 index cards, Michigan Live, Oct. 1, 
2015, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/10/flint official savs data on lo.html 
(attached as Ex. 59). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 12 of 16 


Flint’s water system has also failed to sample the same sites across monitoring 
periods or document the reasons for declining to sample the same sites, as the Lead and 
Copper Rule requires. 66 Sampling new sites from one monitoring period to the next is 
permitted only if a site “is no longer accessible” to the water system or “no longer fits the 
requirements of a priority site.” 67 Records show that in the January-June 2015 monitoring 
period, Flint’s water system retested only thirteen of the one hundred sites it sampled in the 
previous monitoring period. 68 It did not provide the required explanation for these 
departures from the previous monitoring period’s sampling sites. 69 Upon information and 
belief, Flint’s water system concentrated its monitoring in areas where it anticipated low 
lead levels, due to recent infrastructure improvements, and selectively retested sites that had 
previously yielded low lead levels. Such selective sampling violates the Lead and Copper 
Rule’s intention that water systems “do not use only those sampling locations with the 
lowest lead or copper levels.” 70 

Flint’s instructions to residents for the collection of tap-water samples also violate the 
Lead and Copper Rule. The Rule allows residents to collect the tap-water samples used to 
monitor lead in drinking water, so long as the water system instructs residents of the 
sampling procedures required by the regulations. 71 Tap-water samples must be “first-draw 
samples,” meaning that the sample must be collected after water in the tap has stood 
motionless in the plumbing system for at least six hours. 72 Flint’s instructions direct 
residents to flush their taps for five minutes prior to letting the water sit for the six required 
hours. This “pre-flushing” has been shown to “result in the minimization of lead capture 
and significant underestimation of lead levels in drinking water.” 73 The water system’s pre- 
flush instruction “negates the intent of the [Lead and Copper Rule] to collect compliance 


66 40 C.F.R. § 141.86(b)(4). 

67 U.S. EPA, Leadand Copper Rule Monitoring and Reporting Guidance for Public Water Systems 25 
(Mar. 2010), http://water.epa.gov/lawsregs/rulesregs/sdwa/lcr/upload/Revised-Lead-and- 
Copper-Rule-Monitoring-and-Reporting-Guidance-for-Public-Water-Svstems.pdf (attached as Ex. 
60). 

68 See July 28 Report, supra note 63 (reporting that the same sample sites were not used) (Ex. 58); 
see also Curt Guyette, Lead Astray: An ACLU of Michigan investigation has found a stream of irregularities 
in Flint’s water tests, Michigan Democracy Watch Blog, Sept. 14, 2015, http: //achimich.org/democra 
cvwatch /index. php/entrv/lead-astrav-an-aclu-of-michigan-investigation-has-found-a-sueam-of- 
irregularities-in-flint-s-water-tests (attached as Ex. 61). 

69 40 C.F.R. § 141. 90(a)(l)(v). 

70 U. S . EPA, Lead and Copper Rule Monitoring and Reporting Guidance for Public Water Systems , supra 
note 67, at 25 (Ex. 60). 

71 40 C.F.R. § 141.86(b)(2). 

72 Id. §§ 141.2, 141.86(b)(2). 

73 Mem. from Miguel Del Toral, U.S. EPA, to Thomas Poy, U.S. EPA, at 2 (June 24, 2015) 
(attached as Ex. 62). 




November 16, 2015 
Page 13 of 16 

samples under ‘worst-case’ conditions,” 74 and goes “against the intent of the monitoring 
protocol, since it changes the normal water use of the homeowners in the sample.” 75 

Flint’s water system is violating the Lead and Copper Rule’s reporting requirements 
by representing to MDEQ that Flint’s monitoring practices are in compliance with the Rule. 
The City’s water system did not provide documentation to MDEQ justifying its selection of 
new sample sites in the January-June 2015 monitoring period, and, upon information and 
belief, is not accurately reporting information concerning whether sampled sites meet 
required regulatory criteria. 76 

The Lead and Copper Rule also requires Flint’s water system to notify each resident 
whose tap water was sampled of the lead results. 77 Upon information and belief, Flint has 
failed and continues to fail to properly notify all residents whose tap water was tested for 
lead of the individual monitoring results. 

B. Flint's water system has failed to maintain optimal corrosion-control 
treatment 

The Lead and Copper Rule required all large public water systems, including Flint’s 
water system, to install an “optimal corrosion control treatment” program by January 1 , 

199 7. 78 After a system has optimized its corrosion-control treatment, the regulations require 
the system to “continue to operate and maintain optimal corrosion control treatment.” 79 
Since April 2014, Flint’s water system has not maintained an optimal corrosion-control 
treatment program. Historically, the water system complied with the corrosion-control 
requirements by purchasing treated water from Detroit. When Flint switched its water 
source to the Flint River in April 2014, it did nothing to treat the Flint River water to 
control corrosion. This failure to maintain optimized corrosion control violates the Lead 
and Copper Rule. 

Although Flint’s water system has resumed its purchase of treated water from 
Detroit, it has not disavowed its erroneous interpretation of the Lead and Copper Rule’s 
corrosion-control requirements. Nor has it committed to maintaining optimized corrosion 
control when it switches water sources again this summer to the KWA pipeline. Flint’s 
water system’s failure to maintain an optimized corrosion-control treatment program is 
likely to recur in the future. 


14 Id. 

75 Letter from Cynthia Dougherty, U.S. EPA, to Rafph Scott, Alliance for Healthy Homes (Sept. 
12, 2008) (attached as Ex. 63). 

76 See 40 C.F.R. § 191.90(a)(l)(i), (a)(l)(v); supra pp. 11-12. 

77 40 C.F.R. § 141.85(d)(1). 

78 Id. § 141.81(d)(4). 

79 A/. § 141.82(g). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 14 of 16 

III. The State of Michigan's failure to maintain a schools testing and remediation 
program violates the Safe Drinking Water Act 

The Act requires each state to establish a program “to assist” schools and day care 
centers in “testing for, and remedying, lead contamination in drinking water.” 80 Test results 
must be made available at schools, with notification to parents and teachers. 81 Michigan, 
upon information and belief, does not maintain a program for school lead testing, 
remediation, and notification. 82 Accordingly, Governor Snyder and MDEQ Director Wyant 
are presently in violation of the Act’s schools provision. 83 

IV. Intent to Sue 

The City of Flint and Michigan state officials have been and continue to be in 
violation of the Tead and Copper Rule’s requirements for monitoring and sampling tap 
water for lead, notifying the public of and reporting to the State tap-water monitoring 
results, and corrosion control. Governor Snyder and MDEQ Director Dan Wyant are in 
violation of the Act’s requirement to maintain a program to assist Michigan schools with 
testing and remediating lead in school drinking water. These violations are likely to 
continue and to recur in the future absent a judicial decree ordering City and State officials 
to comply with the Act. If the City of Flint and the Michigan state officials identified above 
fail to cure their noncompliance with the Act within sixty days, Concerned Pastors for 
Social Action, Melissa Mays, ACLU of Michigan, and NRDC will file suit in federal 
district court seeking declaratory relief, injunctive relief, and litigation costs, as appropriate. 

The name, address, and telephone number of each person giving notice pursuant to 
this letter are: 

Concerned Pastors for Social Action 
2200 Forrest Hill 
Flint, MI 48504 
(810) 394-6787 

Attention: Pastor Allen Overton 


80 42 U.S.C. § 300j-24(d)(l). 

81 Id. § 300j-24(d)(2). 

82 Although MDEQ recently announced “an education campaign” to help Michigan schools 
learn how to test their water for lead, MDEQ has yet to release the details of this effort, incfuding 
whether it wifi offer the kind of assistance with testing, remediation, and notification contempiated 
by the Safe Drinking Water Act. See Higgins, Michigan to launch lead education effort statewide, supra 
note 44 (Ex. 51). 

83 MDEQ has primary enforcement authority in Michigan for tire Safe Drinking Water Act. See 
MDEQ, Drinking Water, http://www.michigan.gOv/deq/0.4561.7-135-3313 3675— .00.html (last 
visited Nov. 13, 2015) (attached as Ex. 64). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 15 of 16 

Melissa Mays 
3714 Beecher Road 
Flint, MI 48503 

American Civil Liberties Union of Michigan 

2966 Woodward Avenue 

Detroit, MI 48103 

(313) 578-6814 

Attention: Michael Steinberg 

Natural Resources Defense Council 
1152 15th Street, NW, Suite 300 
Washington, DC 20005 
(202) 289-2385 

Attention: Dimple Chaudhary 

Do not hesitate to contact us if you would like to discuss this matter. 


Respectfully, 


A i 


Dimple Chaudhary / •• 

Natural Resources Defense Council 




1152 15th Street, NW, Suite 300 
Washington, DC 20005 
(202) 289-2385 


Sarah Tallman 
Anjali Waikar 
Evan Feinauer 

Natural Resources Defense Council 
20 North Wacker Drive, Suite 1600 
Chicago, IL 60606 
(312)651-7918 



American Civil Liberties Union of 
Michigan 

2966 Woodward Avenue 
Detroit, MI 48103 
(313) 578-6814 


Counsel for American Civil Liberties Union 
of Michigan 


Counsel for Concerned Pastors for Social Action, 
Melissa Mays, and Natural Resources Defense 
Council 


Enclosure 



November 16, 2015 
Page 16 of 16 

cc: 

Administrator Gina McCarthy 
U.S. EPA Headquarters 
William Jefferson Clinton Building 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Mail Code: 1101 A 
Washington, DC 20460 
McCarthy . gina@Epa. gov 

Regional Administrator Susan Hedman 

U.S. EPA Region 5 

77 West Jackson Boulevard 

Mail Code: R-19J 

Chicago, IL 60604 

Hedman.susan@Epa.gov 

Attorney General Bill Schuette 
State of Michigan 

G. Mennen Williams Building, 7th Floor 

525 W. Ottawa Street 

P.O. Box 30212 

Lansing, MI 48909 

miag@michigan. gov 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Brader, Valerie (LARA) 

Monday, November 16, 2015 9:54 AM 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Weber, Travis (GOV); Redford, James (GOV) 
FW: NRDC and Flint 

2015-11-16-SDWA-Notice of Intent to Sue-Flint-FINAL.PDF 


From: Gonzalez, ArianaVHHHHHBH 
Sent: Monday, November 16, 2015 9:13 AM 
To: Brader, Valerie (LARA) 

Subject: NRDC and Flint 


Hi Valerie, 


I hoped to catch you on the phone, but didn't make it through, ! wanted you to hear from me that NRDC's litigation 
team is at this moment filing a notice of intent to sue among others the City of Flint, Governor Snyder, and Dan Wyant 
under the Safe Drinking Water Act. NRDC along with the Concerned Pastors for Social Action, Melissa Mays, the 
American Civil Liberties Union of Michigan will working together in the state on this issue. I can put you in touch with 
those working in Flint if you’d like and will continue to be a resource and partner on all energy related matters. Please 
let me know if you have questions or would like more information. 

Ariana 


Energy Policy Analyst 

NATURAL RESOURCES 
DEFENSE COUNCIL 

20 N. WACKER DRIVE, SUITE 1800 
CHICAGO, It. 60606 
T 312.6517924 



1 


November 16, 2015 


By Certified Mail, Return Receipt Requested 

City of Flint 

Attn: Mayor Karen Williams Weaver 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
may or@city offlint . co m 

Governor Rick Snyder 
P.O.Box 30013 
Lansing, MI 48909 
contactmichigan@state. mi.us 

Director Dan Wyant 

Michigan Department of Environmental 

Quality 

Constitution Hall 
525 West Allegan Street 
P.O. Box 30473 
Lansing, MI 48909-7973 
WyantD@michigan.gov 

Treasurer Nick A. Khouri 
Michigan Department of Treasury 
Richard H. Austin Building 
430 West Allegan Street 
Lansing, MI 48922 
KhouriN @michigan. gov 

RTAB Chairperson Frederick Headen 
Flint City Hall 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
HeadenF@michigan. gov 


RTAB Member Brian Larkin 
Flint City Hall 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
blarkin@flintandgenessee.org 

RTAB Member David McGhee 
Flint City Hall 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
drmcghee@skillman. org 

RTAB Member Robert McMahan 
Flint City Hall 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
president@kettering. edu 

RTAB Member Beverly Walker-Griffea 

Flint City Hall 

1101 South Saginaw Street 

Flint, MI 48502 

b . walkergriffea@mcc .edu 

City Administrator Natasha Henderson 

Flint City Hall 

1101 South Saginaw Street 

Flint, MI 48502 

nhenderson@cityofflint.com 


Re: Notice of Intent to Sue Under the Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. 

§ 300j-8(b)(l)(a), for Failure to Control Lead in Drinking Water in Flint, 
Michigan, and Failure to Assist Michigan Schools with Lead Testing and 
Remediation 

We write on behalf of Concerned Pastors for Social Action, Melissa Mays, the 
American Civil Liberties Union of Michigan (ACLU of Michigan), and the Natural 



November 16, 2015 
Page 2 of 16 

Resources Defense Council (NRDC), nonprofit citizens’ organizations and individuals 
working to secure safe drinking water for the residents of Flint, Michigan. Since April 2014, 
the City of Flint and Michigan state officials have failed to monitor and control for lead in 
Flint’s drinking water, and to maintain a program to assist Michigan schools with lead 
testing and remediation, in violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. § 300f et 
seq. This letter provides notice pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 300j-8(b)(l)(a) that we intend to sue 
the City of Flint; Rick Snyder, Governor of Michigan; Dan Wyant, Director of Michigan 
Department of Environmental Quality; Nick A. Khouri, Treasurer of Michigan; Frederick 
Headen, Chairperson of the Flint Receivership Transition Advisory Board (Board); Brian 
Tarkin, David McGhee, Robert McMahan, and Beverly Walker-Griffea, Members, RTAB; 
and Natasha Henderson, Flint City Administrator, if these violations are not remedied 
within sixty days. 1 

Concerned Pastors for Social Action is an association of religious leaders from more 
than thirty churches and ministries in the Flint area that has advocated for the rights of the 
underserved for nearly fifty years. Melissa Mays is a Flint resident whose family has 
suffered from serious health problems as a result of the City’s failure to provide safe drinking 
water. The ACTU of Michigan works in courts, legislatures, and communities to preserve 
the protections that our laws guarantee to all citizens. NRDC is a national membership 
organization committed to protecting public health and the environment and to reducing 
the exposure of all communities to toxic chemicals. These groups and individuals continue 
to be harmed by the violations of the Safe Drinking Water Act by the City and Michigan 
state officials, detailed below. 

I. City and State officials have exposed and continue to expose Flint residents to 

dangerous amounts of lead in drinking water 

A. The City, Emergency Manager, and State Treasurer chose the Flint River 
as a primary drinking-water source 

In the fall of 20 1 1 , Michigan Governor Rick Snyder declared a financial emergency 
in the City of Flint and appointed an emergency manager to take control of the City’s 
operations and finances. 2 Flint Mayor Dayne Walling and the City Council were stripped of 
all authority except as specifically allowed by the Emergency Manager, and the City was 
placed in state receivership. 3 Under Michigan’s Focal Financial Stability and Choice Act, an 


1 These individuals are noticed in their official capacities. 

2 See Mich. Comp. Laws § 141.1549; Letter from Gov. Rick Snyder to Mayor Dayne Walling 
and Flint City Council (Nov. 8, 2011), http : / /www. michisan . gov/documents/freasurv/Flint- 
GovernorsDetermination-11-8-11 417435 7.pdf (attached as Ex. 1); Dawson Bell, Governor names 
Flint native as city ’s emergency financial manager, DetroitFree Press, Nov. 30, 2011, http: / / www.freep. 
com/article/201 1 1 130/NEWS06/ 1 1 1300370/Govemor-names-Flint-native-citv-s-emergencv- 
financial-manager (attached as Ex. 2). 

3 Mich. Comp. Laws § 141.1549(2). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 3 of 16 

Emergency Manager has “broad powers” to “rectify the financial emergency and to assure 
fiscal accountability of the local government.” 4 

While under control of the Emergency Manager, the City faced decisions about the 
future of its drinking-water supply. For fifty years, the City had purchased drinking water 
from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (Detroit), which sources water from 
Lake Efuron. 5 In response to rising water rates charged by Detroit, in March 2013, the City 
Council voted to join the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA), a newly formed municipal 
water supply system. The KWA was planning to build a pipeline to distribute water directly 
from Lake Huron to mid-Michigan communities, including Genesee County, where Flint is 
located. 6 The City Council’s vote did not become effective until several weeks later, after 
both the Emergency Manager and State Treasurer approved the decision. 7 

The City’s contract with Detroit was set to expire in April 2014, at least eighteen 
months before the KWA pipeline was scheduled to be completed. 8 Faced with a year-and-a- 
half gap in the City’s water supply, the Emergency Manager declined to negotiate a short- 
term contract with Detroit and decided instead to use the Flint River as a primary drinking- 
water source. 9 The City had previously explored — and rejected — the Flint River as a 
primary drinking-water source. This is because the Flint Water Treatment Plant would have 
required fifty million dollars in upgrades to treat the river water and “produce finished water 
in conformance with the current federal and state drinking water regulations.” 10 


4 Id. 

5 See Dominic Adams, Closing the valve on history: Flint cuts water flow from Detroit after nearly 50 
years , Michigan Live, Apr. 25, 2014, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2014/04/closing 

the valve on history f.html (attached as Ex. 3). 

6 Steve Carmody, Flint opting to get its future tap water from Lake Huron , Michigan Radio, Mar. 25, 
2013, http: / /michiganradio . or g/post/ flint-op tin g- get-its-future-tap-water-lake-huron#stream/ 
(attached as Ex. 4); Karegnondi Water Authority, About, http://wsvw.karegnondi.eom/#labout/c2 
0r9 (last visited Nov. 13, 2015) (attached as Ex. 5). 

7 -See Mich. Comp. Laws § 141 . 1552(l)(g), (3); Emergency Manager, Resolution to Purchase 
Capacity from Karegnondi Water Authority (adopted Mar. 29, 2013) (attached as Ex. 6); Letter 
from Andy Dillon, State Treasurer, to Edward Kurtz, Emergency Manager (Apr. 11, 2013) 
(authorizing Emergency Manager to enter into contract with KWA) (attached as Ex. 7). 

8 Sarah Schuch, KWA pipeline work continues as Flint water lead concerns rise, Michigan Live, Sept. 
25, 2015, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/09/kwa pipeline projected to be c. 
html (attached as Ex. 8); see Ron Fonger, Detroit gives notice: It’s terminating water contract covering Flint, 
Genesee County in one year, Michigan Live, Apr. 19, 2013, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index. 
ssf/2013/04/detroit gives notice its termi.html (attached as Ex. 9). 

9 Letter from Darnell Earley, Emergency Manager, to Sue McCormick, Detroit Water & Sewer 
Dep’t (Mar. 7, 2014) (explaining that the City “has actively pursued using the Flint River as a 
temporary water source” instead of accepting Detroit’s offer to provide water to the City) (attached 
as Ex. 10). 

10 Cost of Service Study (2011), Appendix 8 to Analysis of the Flint River as a Permanent Water 
Supply for the City of Flint, http://www.scribd.com/doc/64382 1 8 1 /Analvsis-of-the-Flint-River-as- 
a-Permanent-Water-Supplv-for-the-Citv-of-Flint-Julv-2011-Appendices-l-to-8 (attached as Ex. 11); 



November 16, 2015 
Page 4 of 16 


Under the Safe Drinking Water Act’s Lead and Copper Rule, Flint’s water system 
could not use the Flint River as a water source without first obtaining approval from the 
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). The Lead and Copper Rule 
required MDEQ to approve both the City’s proposed addition of a new water source (the 
Flint River) and the long-term change in water treatment (from treatment through Detroit’s 
water plant to treatment at the Flint Water Treatment Plant). 11 In April 2014, MDEQ 
approved the switch to river water. 12 The City immediately began pumping Flint River 
water through the City’s distribution pipes and into residents’ taps. 

B. Dangerous lead contamination results from the City's switch to river water 

In the twenty months following the switch in water sources, residents’ drinking water 
has been at times cloudy, discolored, and foul-smelling. 13 Residents reported that they have 
experienced hair loss, skin rashes, and vomiting after drinking the water. 14 In the summer of 
2014, the City was forced to issue several boil-water notices after tap water tested positive 
for total coliform bacteria. 15 The City’s subsequent treatment of the water to kill disease- 
carrying pathogens resulted in elevated levels of total trihalo methanes, a disinfection 
byproduct that can cause serious health problems, including an increased risk of cancer. 16 


see also Kristin Longley, Water pipeline v. Flint River: City of Flint studying its drinking water options , 
Michigan Live, Jan. 22, 2011, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2011/01/water pipelin 
e vs flint river.html (attached as Ex. 12); Dominic Adams, Flint River now an option for drinking water 
following Detroit’s termination of contract, Michigan Live, July 23, 2013, http://www.mlive.com/news 
/flint/index.ssf/2013/07/citv readying water plant to t.html (quoting city officials’ explanation 
for rejecting use of Flint River: “upgrades to Flint’s water plant would be too expensive, the river 
didn’t provide enough capacity to serve Flint residents’ water needs and the Michigan Department 
of Environmental Quality would not allow it”) (attached as Ex. 13). 

11 40 C.F.R. § 141.90(a)(3); see also id. § 141.81(a)-(b). 

12 See Adams, Closing the valve on history, supra note 5 (Ex. 3). 

13 See Curt Guyette, In Flint, Michigan, Overpriced Water is Causing People’s Skin to Erupt in Rashes 
and Hair to Fall Out, The Nation, July 16, 2015, http://www.thenation.com/article/in-flint- 
michigan-overpriced-water-is-causing-peoples-skin-to-erupt-and-hair-to-fall-out/ (attached as Ex. 

14); Wenonah Hauter, Flint’s Brown Water Blues, Huffington Post, July 10, 2015, http: //www.huffin 
gtonpost.com/wenonah-hauter/flints-brown-water-blues b 7765132.html (attached as Ex. 15). 

14 Laura Gottesdiener, Flint, Mich., residents find state water control hard to swallow, A1 Jazeera 
America, Apr. 3, 2015, http://america. aliazeera.com/ar tides/2015/4/3/flint-residents-find-state- 
water-contr ol-har d-to-swallo w . html (attached as Ex. 16). 

15 Ron Fonger, Flint issues boil water advisory for section of the city after positive test result for total 
coliform bacteria, Michigan Live, Sept. 5, 2014, http://www.mlive.eom/news/flint/index.ssf/2014/0 
9 /flint issues boil water adviso.html (attached as Ex. 17). 

16 Robin Erb, Who wants to drink Flint’s water?, Detroit Free Press, Jan. 23, 2015, http:/ /www.free 
p.com/storv/news/local/michigan/20 15/01 /22/water-woes-latest-hit-flint/22 19329 1 / (attached as 
Ex. 18); Mich. Dep’t ofEnvtl. Quality, Violation Notice — Maximum Contaminant Level for Total 
Trihalomethanes (Dec. 16, 2014) (attached as Ex. 19); U.S. EPA, Basic Information about 
Disinfection Byproducts in Drinking Water, http://water.epa.gov/dilnk/contaminants/basicinform 




November 16, 2015 
Page 5 of 16 


Because Flint River water is also highly corrosive, dangerous amounts of lead began 
to leach out of pipes and into the City’s drinking water. 17 Lead in drinking water occurs 
primarily from corrosion of pipes and other plumbing materials that contain lead or lead 
solder. 18 The Lead and Copper Rule requires water systems to manage lead levels by 
controlling corrosion, which is often accomplished by adding corrosion-inhibiting 
chemicals. 19 Water systems must implement and maintain an “optimal” corrosion-control 
treatment program that “minimizes the lead . . . concentrations at users’ taps.” 20 

Flint did not consider how to control the corrosivity of the river water before 
switching water sources, nor did MDEQ require the City to implement any corrosion- 
control measures. Rather, beginning in April 2014, the City did not use any form of 
treatment to control corrosion. 21 The City waited until after its residents were drinking the 
river water to assess whether it posed a risk of increased lead exposure. MDEQ endorsed 
this approach. In June 2014, Flint’s water system initiated the first of two six-month 
monitoring periods to test tap water for lead under the Lead and Copper Rule; the second 
six-month period ran from January to June 2015. 22 During these monitoring periods, the 
water system used flawed testing methods that appear to have been designed to underreport 
the lead content of residents’ drinking water. 23 


ation/disinfectionbvproducts.cfm (last updated Dec. 13, 2013) (attached as Ex. 20); see also 40 
C.F.R. § 141.64(b). 

17 Marc Edwards, Test Update: Flint River water 19X more corrosive than Detroit water for Lead Solder; 
Now What?, Flint Water Study (Sept. 11, 2015), http://flintwaterstudv.org/2015/09/test-update- 
flint-river-water-19x-more-corrosive-than-detroit-water-for-lead-solder-now-what/ (attached as Ex. 
21); Marc Edwards, Flint River water is very corrosive to lead, and causing lead contamination in homes, 
Flint Water Study (Sept. 2, 2015), http : / / flintwater stu dv.org/2015/Q9 / flint-river s-water-is-verv- 
corrosive-to-lead-and-causing-lead-contamination-in-homes/ (attached as Ex. 22). The river water is 
so corrosive that in October 2014, a local GM engine plant decided to switch back to Lake Huron 
water to avoid damage to equipment at the plant from corrosion. Brianna Owczarzak, GM says no to 
Flintwater, WNEM, Oct. 14, 2014, http://www.wnem.com/storv/26785625/gm-savs-no-to-flint- 
water (attached as Ex. 23). 

18 See Maximum Contaminant Level Goals and National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
for Lead and Copper, 56 Fed. Reg. 26,460, 26,464 (June 7, 1991). 

19 See 40 C.F.R. § 141.82. 

20 Id. §§ 141.2; 141.80(d). 

21 See Email from Pat Cook, MDEQ, to Miguel Del Toral, U.S. EPA (Apr. 24, 2015) (attached 
as Ex. 24). 

22 See 40 C.F.R. § 141.86; Email from Pat Cook, supra note 21 (Ex. 24). 

23 See infra pp. 11-13. 



November 16, 2015 
Page 6 of 16 

Flint’s monitoring data showed that some residents’ water contained lead at 
concentrations above the federal “action level” of 15 parts per billion (ppb). 24 These high 
lead levels put residents at risk of abroad array of serious, irreversible health effects, 
including cognitive impairment, kidney damage, and increased blood pressure. 25 When the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) learned of these high lead sampling results in 
February 2015, it notified MDEQ officials that the sampling results raised significant 
concerns about corrosion from lead pipes in Flint’s distribution system. 26 Nonetheless, 
throughout the monitoring periods, the City and MDEQ maintained that these high lead 
levels were isolated and that the data, taken together, demonstrated Flint’s compliance with 
the Lead and Copper Rule. 27 

C. Community advocacy and independent testing prompt long past due 
response from City and State officials 

As the City concluded its second six-month round of sampling in July 2015, and 
notified some Flint residents of elevated lead levels in their tap water, the community 
became increasingly concerned. A small coalition of local groups, including Water You 
Fighting For and Concerned Pastors for Social Action, began working with researchers at 
Virginia Tech to conduct their own lead sampling of Flint’s water. The Virginia Tech 
scientists found that ten percent of the more than 250 samples collected from Flint 
residences had lead levels of 25 ppb or more, well above the federal action level for lead. 28 
Several samples exceeded 100 ppb, and one sample exceeded 1000 ppb. 29 Though aware of 


24 See Mich. Dep’t of Envtl Quality, Lead and Copper Report and Consumer Notice of Lead 
Result Certificate for Community Water Supply (Aug. 20, 2015) (showing six samples with lead 
levels over the action level) (attached as Ex. 25); 40 C.F.R. § 141.80(c)(1). 

25 See, e.g., U.S. EPA, Integrated Science Assessment for Lead tbl.ES-1 (June 2013) (attached as 
Ex. 26); U.S. EPA, Basic Information About Lead in Drinking Water, htt p://water.epa. gov/drink/ 
contaminants/basicinformation/lead.cfm (last updated June 26, 2015) (explaining that “[i]nfants 
and children who drink water containing lead in excess of the action level could experience delays in 
their physical or mental development,” and that “[ajdults who drink this water over many years 
could develop kidney problems or high blood pressure”) (attached as Ex. 27); see also National 
Ambient Air Quality Standards for Lead, 80 Fed. Reg. 278, 290 (Jan. 5, 2015). 

26 See, e.g., Email from Jennifer Crooks, U.S. EPA, to Stephen Busch, MDEQ, and Mike Prysby, 
MDEQ (Feb. 26, 2015) (attached as Ex. 28). 

27 See Nancy Kaffer, MDEQ e-mails show stunning indifference to Flint peril, Detroit Free Press, Oct. 
22, 2015, http://www.freep.com/storv/opinion/columnists/nancv-kaffer/2015/10/21/indifference 
-characterized-state-approach-flint-water/74289430/ (attached as Ex. 29). 

28 Flint Town Hall Meeting Presentation and Distribution of lead results across Flint by ward and zip codes, 
Flint Water Study, Sept. 16, 2015, http : //flintwater study. org/20 1 5/09 /distribution-of-lead-results- 
across-flint-bv-ward-and-zip-codes/ (attached as Ex. 30); Ron Fonger, Virginia Tech professor says 
Flint’s tests for lead in water can’t be trusted, Michigan Live, Sept. 15, 2015, http:/ /www.mlive.com/ne 
ws/flint/index.ssf/2015/09/virginia tech researcher savs.html (attached as Ex. 31). 

29 Marc Edwards et al., Lead testing results for water sampled by residents, Flint Water Sffidy, Sept. 

28, 2015, http://flintwaterstudv.org/information-for-flint-residents/results-for-citizen-testing-for- 
lead-300-kits/ (attached as Ex. 32). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 7 of 16 

the Virginia Tech sampling results, MDEQ officials continued to insist that Flint’s water 
was safe to drink. 30 

In September 2015, a medical study conducted by a local pediatrician confirmed the 
kinds of adverse health impacts that residents had voiced concern about for months: the rate 
of Flint children with elevated blood lead levels had nearly doubled since the City changed 
its drinking-water source. 31 State officials and the Governor reacted by “downplaying] and 
in some cases attempting] to discredit” the pediatrician’s findings, and dismissing citizen 
concerns as “near-hysteri[cal].” 32 

Subsequent testing by MDEQ revealed that at least four schools in Flint had lead 
levels in their drinking water above the federal action level. 33 At Freeman Elementary 
School, water tested had lead levels over 100 ppb, more than six times the federal action 
level. 34 This increase in lead exposure is particularly dangerous in Flint, a community where 
residents are already at higher risk of elevated blood lead levels and lead poisoning. 
Michigan ranks fifth worst in the country for harmful exposures to lead. 35 Tow income is a 
risk factor for lead poisoning, and more than a third of families in Flint live below the 
poverty level, three times the national average. 36 Children in Flint also face high risk of lead 


30 Ron Fonger, Feds sending in experts to help Flint keep lead out of water, Michigan Live, Sept. 10, 
2015, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/09/universitv researchers dont dr.html 
(attached as Ex. 33). 

31 Pediatric Lead Exposure in Flint, MI: Concerns from the Medical Community (PowerPoint 
Presentation) (presented on Sept. 24, 2015), available at http://flintwaterstudv.org/2015/09/pediatri 
c-lead-exposure-presentation-from-hurlev-medical-center-doctors-concerning-flint-mi/ (attached as 
Ex. 34). 

32 Study suggests Flint’s water causing increased lead poisoning, Michigan Radio, Sept. 28, 2015, 
http://michiganradio.org/post/studv-suggests-flints-water-causing-increased-lead- 
poisoning#stream/Q (attached as Ex. 35); Ron Fonger, State says data shows no link to Flint River, 
elevated lead in blood, Michigan Live, Sept. 24, 2015, http://www.mlive.eom/news/flint/index.ssf/2 
015/09/state savs its data shows no c.html (attached as Ex. 36); Did this Michigan Town Poison its 
Children?, U.S. News & World Report, Sept. 24, 2015, http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/201 
5/09/25/flint-michigan-children-show-high-levels-of-lead-in-blood (attached as Ex. 37). 

33 Steve Carmody, Four Flint schools have high lead levels in their water, Michigan Radio, Oct. 8, 
2015, http://michiganradio.or g/post/four-fhnt-schools-have-high-lead-levels-their-water (attached 
as Ex. 38). 

34 Id. 

35 Ctrs. for Disease Control & Prevention, Public Health in Action: Lead Poisoning Prevention in 
Michigan (last updated Feb. 4, 2013), http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/information/healthv homes lead. 
htm (attached as Ex. 39). 

36 2009-2013 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates, 2013, available at http : / /factfinder. 
census.gov/faces/nav/isf/pages/index.xhtml (enter “Flint, MI” in the box under “Community 
Facts,” click on “Income” on left-side bar, then click “Selected Economic Characteristics” under 
“2013 American Community Survey”) (table attached as Ex. 40 compares data from Flint, 
Michigan, to Michigan and the United States). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 8 of 16 

exposure from lead-paint dust, as nearly ninety percent of Flint’s housing stock was built 
before 1978 (when the federal ban on high-lead paint went into effect). 37 

Finally, in late September 2015, the City abandoned its assertions that Flint’s 
drinking water was safe. Nearly seven months after the City first saw dangerously high 
levels of lead in some residents’ water, Flint issued a drinking-water advisory and called for 
state financial assistance to switch the water system back to Detroit’s supply. 38 Two weeks 
later, Governor Snyder requested six million dollars from the state legislature to reconnect 
the Flint water system to Detroit. 39 With additional funding from the City and a private 
foundation, the switch was completed in mid-October. 40 

Following the switch back to Detroit water, some government officials began to ask 
questions about what went wrong in the course of Flint’s change in water sources. 41 
Governor Snyder created a task force to review water management and testing in Flint, 42 
and EPA established its own task force “to provide the Agency’s technical expertise through 
regular conversations” with the City and MDEQ. 43 Governor Snyder has also announced 


37 2012 Annual Data Report on Blood Lead Levels of Children in Michigan 26 (Apr. 30, 2013), 
https://www.michigan.gov/documents/mdch/2012AnnualDataReportOnBloodLeadLevels 41950 
8 7.pdf (attached as Ex. 41); Am. Cancer Soc’y, Lead, Lead in the Environment, http://www.cancer.o 
rg/cancer/cancercauses/othercarcinogens/athome/lead (last updated May 27, 2014) (explaining 
that lead paint is a “major” source of exposure) (attached as Ex. 42); Maj. Thomas F. Zimmerman, 
The Regulation of Lead-Based Paint in Air Force Housing, 44 A.F. L. Rev. 169, 174-75 (1998). 

38 City of Flint Issues Lead Advisory , City of Flint, Sept. 25, 2015, https://www.citvofflint.com/201 
5/09/25/citv-of-flint-issues-lead-advisorv/ (attached as Ex. 43); Steve Carmody, Flint officials 
exploring return to Detroit water, Michigan Radio, Sept. 28, 2015, http : / /michiganradio .or g/post/flint- 
officials-exploring-return-detroit-water#stream/Q (attached as Ex. 44). 

39 John Wisely, Snyder announces $12 million plan to fix Flint water , Detroit Free Press, Oct. 8, 

2015, http://www.freep.com/storv/news/local/michigan/2015/10/08/snvder-flint-watei'- 
reconnect/ 73567778/ (attached as Ex. 45). 

40 Amanda Emery, Flint reconnects to Detroit water, may take 3 weeks to clear all pipes, Michigan Live, 
Oct. 16, 2015, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/10/flint reconnecting to detroit 
■html (attached as Ex. 46). 

41 E.g., Letter from Sen. Jim Ananich, Mich. Senate Minority Leader, to Susan Hedman, U.S. 
EPA, and Gina McCarthy, U.S. EPA (Oct. 21, 2015) (attached as Ex. 47); Letter from Rep. Daniel 
Kildee, U.S. Congressman, to Gina McCarthy, U.S. EPA (Oct. 21, 2015) (attached as Ex. 48). 

42 Press Release, Gov. Rick Snyder, Gov. Rick Snyder announces Flint Water Task Force to review 
state, federal and municipal actions, offer recommendations (Oct. 21, 2015), http : / / www . michigan . gov / sn 
vder/0.4668. 7-277-57577 57657-367761-.00.html (attached as Ex. 49). 

43 Press Release, U.S. EPA, EPA Establishes Safe Drinking Water Task Force to Provide Technical 
Expertise to MDEQ and City of Flint (Oct. 16, 2015), http://vosemite.epa.gOv/opa/admpress.nsf/0/A 
92DE629DB86E66685257EE000579593 ( attached as Ex. 50k 




November 16, 2015 
Page 9 of 16 

plans to launch an “education campaign soon to help schools statewide learn how to get 
their water tested” for lead. 44 

Despite this proliferation of task forces and campaigns, neither the City nor MDEQ 
has announced changes in the City’s lead monitoring practices in the wake of Flint’s public- 
health crisis. Rather, Flint and MDEQ have maintained that these practices are accurate 
and adequate, despite the near certainty that they are underrepresenting lead contamination 
in many of Flint’s high-risk homes. 

II. City and State officials are in violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act's Lead 

and Copper Rule 

The Safe Drinking Water Act (the Act) authorizes citizens to sue any governmental 
entity “who is alleged to be in violation of any requirement” under the statute. 45 These 
requirements include the national primary drinking-water regulations for lead and copper 
set forth in the Dead and Copper Rule. 46 The Lead and Copper Rule obligates water systems 
to monitor and control for lead in drinking water. 47 

Since April 2014, Flint’s water system has failed to comply with the Lead and 
Copper Rule’s requirements for monitoring water for lead, notifying the public of tap-water 
monitoring results, reporting monitoring results to MDEQ, and controlling corrosion from 
lead pipes. 48 These violations systematically result in the City’s underestimating lead levels 
in its drinking water, masking a public-health crisis. The violations are ongoing and likely to 
recur in the future: Flint’s water system presently is obligated to monitor for lead every six 
months, and there is no indication that Flint has changed or disavowed its inadequate 
approach to monitoring. 49 


44 See Lori Higgins, Michigan to launch lead education effort statewide, Detroit Free Press, Oct. 13, 
2015, http://www.freep.com/storv/news/local/michigan/2015/10/13/lead-water-flint-michigan- 
testing/73871480/ (attached as Ex. 51). 

45 42 U.S.C. § 300j-8(a)(l). 

46 See id. § 300g-l(b)(l)(A); 40 C.F.R. § 141.80(a)(1). 

47 See, e.g., 40 C.F.R. § 141.86. 

48 Flint’s water system is subject to the requirements of the Lead and Copper Rule because it is a 
“community water system” not otherwise exempted from the regulations. 40 C.F.R. §§ 141.80(a)(1), 
141.2. 

49 See Tamaska v. City of Bluff City, 26 F. App’x 482, 485 (6th Cir. 2002) (citing Chesapeake Bay 
Found, v. Gwaltney of Smithfield, 844 F.2d 170, 171-72 (4th Cir. 1988)). A water system is required to 
monitor tap water for lead every six months if it (1) exceeds the action level for any monitoring 
period, or (2) “fails to operate at or above the minimum value or within tire range of values for tire 
water quality parameters specified by the State ... for more than 9 days in any six-month period.” 40 
C.F.R. § 141.86(d)(4)(vi)(B). Flint’s water system failed to maintain applicable values of 
orthophosphate and/or pH designated as the optimal water quality parameters by MDEQ. In 
addition, had the water system conducted monitoring in compliance with the Lead and Copper Rule 
during the January to June 2015 period, it likely would have exceeded the lead action level. 



November 16, 2015 
Page 10 of 16 


Under the Act, a “supplier of water” is “any person who owns or operates a public 
water system.” 50 The City of Flint owns Flint’s water system. 51 Upon information and belief, 
the State officials administering Flint’s receivership and the City presently operate Flint’s 
water system. As discussed above, Flint’s Emergency Manager exercised the authority of 
the local government in the place of Flint’s mayor and city council. The Emergency 
Manager managed the water system and conducted its affairs, including making the 
decision to use the Flint River as a primary drinking-water source. 52 In April 2015, 

Governor Snyder removed the Emergency Manager and appointed a Receivership 
Transition Advisory Board to oversee the City’s affairs until the receivership is terminated. 53 
The Board has control over the City’s budget, and must approve all decisions adopted by the 
City Council. 54 The Michigan Focal Financial Stability and Choice Act requires the State 
Treasurer to sit on a receivership transition advisory board for any municipality for which 
the governor appoints such a board, and Governor Snyder has appointed the State Treasurer 
(or his designee) to chair Flint’s Board. 55 The City Administrator reports to the Board, 
manages the City’s daily administrative operations, and directs City department heads in 
carrying out the daily activities of the City. 56 To date, the City remains in receivership, and 
its actions remain subject to approval of the Board. 57 

Accordingly, the City of Flint; Governor Snyder; Dan Wyant, Director of MDEQ; 
Nick A. Khouri, Treasurer of Michigan; Frederick Headen, Chairperson of the Flint 
Receivership Transition Advisory Board; Brian Tarkin, David McGhee, Robert McMahan, 


50 42 U.S.C. § 300f(5). 

51 See City of Flint, Water System Update, Sept. 2015, https://www.citvofflint.com/wp- 
content/uploads/Citv-Council-Water-Presentation-9- 1 4-20 1 5.pdf (attached as Ex. 52). 

52 See United States v. Twp. of Brighton, 153 F.3d307, 314 (6th Cir. 1998) (defining “operator” for 
purposes of CERCLA as an entity that “performed some affirmative acts,” such as “directing the 
workings, managing, or conducting the affairs” of a facility) (internal quotation marks and 
alterations omitted); cf United States v. Alisal Water Corp., 1 14 F. Supp. 2d 927, 938 (N.D. Cal. 2000) 
(applying case law discussing CERCLA “operator” liability to the Safe Drinking Water Act 
context). 

53 Mich. Comp. Laws § 141.1563(1); Press Release, Gov. Rick Snyder, Gov. Rick Snyder: City of 
Flint ready to move forward as financial emergency resolved, Apr. 29, 2015, htt p://www.michigan.gov/ sn 
vder/0.4668.7-277-57577 57657-353433-.00.html (attached as Ex. 53); Emergency Manager Order 
20 Ifll 4.a.6, 4.a.7 (adopted Apr. 25, 2015), https://www.citvofflint.com/wp-content/uploads/Order 
-No.-20.pdf (attached as Ex. 54). 

54 Emergency Manager Order 20 4. a. 6, 4.a.7, supra note 53 (Ex. 54). 

55 S<?<? Mich. Comp. Laws § 141.1563(2); Letter from Gov. Rick Snyder to Hon. Ruth Johnson, 
Mich. Sec’y of State (Apr. 29, 2015), http://michigan.gov/documents/freasuiv/Flint RTAB Appo 
intments 488251 7.pdf (attached as Ex. 55). 

56 Emergency Manager Order 3 4-6, 25 (adopted Apr. 10, 2015), https://www.citvofflint.com 

/wp-content/uploads/Order-N o .-3 .pdf (attached as Ex. 56). The City Administrator was appointed 
by the Emergency Manager and can be removed only with the Board’s consent. 

57 Id. 



November 16, 2015 
Page 11 of 16 

and Beverly Walker-Griffea, Members of the Board; and Natasha Henderson, Flint City 
Administrator, are responsible for the violations of the Act by Flint’s water system which 
have endangered and will continue to endanger the health of Flint’s residents. 

A. Flint's water system is in violation of the Lead and Copper Rule's tap- 
water monitoring, reporting, and notification requirements 

The Lead and Copper Rule requires water systems to identify a pool of sampling 
sites prior to the commencement of a monitoring period. 58 This requirement is designed to 
target residences at high risk of lead contamination in drinking water, such as homes served 
by lead service lines. 59 In violation of the Rule, Flint’s water system does not select sampling 
sites for lead monitoring based on a pre-established sampling pool. For Flint’s most recent 
completed monitoring period, January- June 2015, the Director of the City’s Department of 
Public Works admitted that Flint “thr[ew] bottles out everywhere just to collect as many 
[samples] as we can, to try and hit our number.” 60 Similarly, email correspondence shows 
that the City has, during several monitoring periods, asked its own employees to submit tap- 
water samples, without regard to whether the employees were part of a pre-selected 
sampling pool. 61 

Under the Lead and Copper Rule, water systems that contain lead service lines also 
must draw fifty percent of their tap-water samples from sites served by a lead service line. 62 
Flint’s water system does not comply with this requirement. The water system reported to 
MDEQ that all the sample sites it used during the January-June 2015 monitoring period 
were residences served by lead service lines. 63 Flint’s Utilities Administrator, however, 
admitted that he was not able to verify that all homes sampled were served by lead service 
lines. 64 This is because City records concerning the locations of lead service lines in the 
distribution system are stored on 45,000 paper notecards. Flint began converting these 
notecards into an electronic spreadsheet this fall, well after the January-June 2015 
monitoring period. 65 


58 See 40 C.F.R. § 141.86(a). 

59 Id. 

60 See ACLU of Michigan, Thirst for Truth: Who’s to Blame for Flint Water Crisis ?, https://www.vo 
utube.com/watch?t=9&v=LTQ9irD2fOY (posted Sept. 23, 2015). 

61 Email from Michael Glasgow, Flint Utilities Adm’r, to Flint municipal staff (June 1, 2015) 
(attached as Ex. 57). 

62 40 C.F.R. § 141.86(a)(8). 

63 See, e.g., City of Flint, Lead and Copper Report and Consumer Notice of Lead Result 
Certificate for Community Water Supply (July 28, 2015) [hereinafter Jufy 28 Report] (attached as 
Ex. 58). 

64 See ACLU of Michigan, Thirst for Truth: Who’s to Blame for Flint Water Crisis?, supra note 60. 

65 See Ron Fonger, Flint data on lead water lines stored on 45,000 index cards, Michigan Live, Oct. 1, 
2015, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/10/flint official savs data on lo.html 
(attached as Ex. 59). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 12 of 16 


Flint’s water system has also failed to sample the same sites across monitoring 
periods or document the reasons for declining to sample the same sites, as the Lead and 
Copper Rule requires. 66 Sampling new sites from one monitoring period to the next is 
permitted only if a site “is no longer accessible” to the water system or “no longer fits the 
requirements of a priority site.” 67 Records show that in the January-June 2015 monitoring 
period, Flint’s water system retested only thirteen of the one hundred sites it sampled in the 
previous monitoring period. 68 It did not provide the required explanation for these 
departures from the previous monitoring period’s sampling sites. 69 Upon information and 
belief, Flint’s water system concentrated its monitoring in areas where it anticipated low 
lead levels, due to recent infrastructure improvements, and selectively retested sites that had 
previously yielded low lead levels. Such selective sampling violates the Lead and Copper 
Rule’s intention that water systems “do not use only those sampling locations with the 
lowest lead or copper levels.” 70 

Flint’s instructions to residents for the collection of tap-water samples also violate the 
Lead and Copper Rule. The Rule allows residents to collect the tap-water samples used to 
monitor lead in drinking water, so long as the water system instructs residents of the 
sampling procedures required by the regulations. 71 Tap-water samples must be “first-draw 
samples,” meaning that the sample must be collected after water in the tap has stood 
motionless in the plumbing system for at least six hours. 72 Flint’s instructions direct 
residents to flush their taps for five minutes prior to letting the water sit for the six required 
hours. This “pre-flushing” has been shown to “result in the minimization of lead capture 
and significant underestimation of lead levels in drinking water.” 73 The water system’s pre- 
flush instruction “negates the intent of the [Lead and Copper Rule] to collect compliance 


66 40 C.F.R. § 141.86(b)(4). 

67 U.S. EPA, Leadand Copper Rule Monitoring and Reporting Guidance for Public Water Systems 25 
(Mar. 2010), http://water.epa.gov/lawsregs/rulesregs/sdwa/lcr/upload/Revised-Lead-and- 
Copper-Rule-Monitoring-and-Reporting-Guidance-for-Public-Water-Svstems.pdf (attached as Ex. 
60). 

68 See July 28 Report, supra note 63 (reporting that the same sample sites were not used) (Ex. 58); 
see also Curt Guyette, Lead Astray: An ACLU of Michigan investigation has found a stream of irregularities 
in Flint’s water tests, Michigan Democracy Watch Blog, Sept. 14, 2015, http: //achimich.org/democra 
cvwatch /index. php/entrv/lead-astrav-an-aclu-of-michigan-investigation-has-found-a-sueam-of- 
irregularities-in-flint-s-water-tests (attached as Ex. 61). 

69 40 C.F.R. § 141. 90(a)(l)(v). 

70 U. S . EPA, Lead and Copper Rule Monitoring and Reporting Guidance for Public Water Systems , supra 
note 67, at 25 (Ex. 60). 

71 40 C.F.R. § 141.86(b)(2). 

72 Id. §§ 141.2, 141.86(b)(2). 

73 Mem. from Miguel Del Toral, U.S. EPA, to Thomas Poy, U.S. EPA, at 2 (June 24, 2015) 
(attached as Ex. 62). 




November 16, 2015 
Page 13 of 16 

samples under ‘worst-case’ conditions,” 74 and goes “against the intent of the monitoring 
protocol, since it changes the normal water use of the homeowners in the sample.” 75 

Flint’s water system is violating the Lead and Copper Rule’s reporting requirements 
by representing to MDEQ that Flint’s monitoring practices are in compliance with the Rule. 
The City’s water system did not provide documentation to MDEQ justifying its selection of 
new sample sites in the January-June 2015 monitoring period, and, upon information and 
belief, is not accurately reporting information concerning whether sampled sites meet 
required regulatory criteria. 76 

The Lead and Copper Rule also requires Flint’s water system to notify each resident 
whose tap water was sampled of the lead results. 77 Upon information and belief, Flint has 
failed and continues to fail to properly notify all residents whose tap water was tested for 
lead of the individual monitoring results. 

B. Flint's water system has failed to maintain optimal corrosion-control 
treatment 

The Lead and Copper Rule required all large public water systems, including Flint’s 
water system, to install an “optimal corrosion control treatment” program by January 1 , 

199 7. 78 After a system has optimized its corrosion-control treatment, the regulations require 
the system to “continue to operate and maintain optimal corrosion control treatment.” 79 
Since April 2014, Flint’s water system has not maintained an optimal corrosion-control 
treatment program. Historically, the water system complied with the corrosion-control 
requirements by purchasing treated water from Detroit. When Flint switched its water 
source to the Flint River in April 2014, it did nothing to treat the Flint River water to 
control corrosion. This failure to maintain optimized corrosion control violates the Lead 
and Copper Rule. 

Although Flint’s water system has resumed its purchase of treated water from 
Detroit, it has not disavowed its erroneous interpretation of the Lead and Copper Rule’s 
corrosion-control requirements. Nor has it committed to maintaining optimized corrosion 
control when it switches water sources again this summer to the KWA pipeline. Flint’s 
water system’s failure to maintain an optimized corrosion-control treatment program is 
likely to recur in the future. 


14 Id. 

75 Letter from Cynthia Dougherty, U.S. EPA, to Rafph Scott, Alliance for Healthy Homes (Sept. 
12, 2008) (attached as Ex. 63). 

76 See 40 C.F.R. § 191.90(a)(l)(i), (a)(l)(v); supra pp. 11-12. 

77 40 C.F.R. § 141.85(d)(1). 

78 Id. § 141.81(d)(4). 

79 A/. § 141.82(g). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 14 of 16 

III. The State of Michigan's failure to maintain a schools testing and remediation 
program violates the Safe Drinking Water Act 

The Act requires each state to establish a program “to assist” schools and day care 
centers in “testing for, and remedying, lead contamination in drinking water.” 80 Test results 
must be made available at schools, with notification to parents and teachers. 81 Michigan, 
upon information and belief, does not maintain a program for school lead testing, 
remediation, and notification. 82 Accordingly, Governor Snyder and MDEQ Director Wyant 
are presently in violation of the Act’s schools provision. 83 

IV. Intent to Sue 

The City of Flint and Michigan state officials have been and continue to be in 
violation of the Tead and Copper Rule’s requirements for monitoring and sampling tap 
water for lead, notifying the public of and reporting to the State tap-water monitoring 
results, and corrosion control. Governor Snyder and MDEQ Director Dan Wyant are in 
violation of the Act’s requirement to maintain a program to assist Michigan schools with 
testing and remediating lead in school drinking water. These violations are likely to 
continue and to recur in the future absent a judicial decree ordering City and State officials 
to comply with the Act. If the City of Flint and the Michigan state officials identified above 
fail to cure their noncompliance with the Act within sixty days, Concerned Pastors for 
Social Action, Melissa Mays, ACLU of Michigan, and NRDC will file suit in federal 
district court seeking declaratory relief, injunctive relief, and litigation costs, as appropriate. 

The name, address, and telephone number of each person giving notice pursuant to 
this letter are: 

Concerned Pastors for Social Action 
2200 Forrest Hill 
Flint, MI 48504 
(810) 394-6787 

Attention: Pastor Allen Overton 


80 42 U.S.C. § 300j-24(d)(l). 

81 Id. § 300j-24(d)(2). 

82 Although MDEQ recently announced “an education campaign” to help Michigan schools 
learn how to test their water for lead, MDEQ has yet to release the details of this effort, incfuding 
whether it wifi offer the kind of assistance with testing, remediation, and notification contempiated 
by the Safe Drinking Water Act. See Higgins, Michigan to launch lead education effort statewide, supra 
note 44 (Ex. 51). 

83 MDEQ has primary enforcement authority in Michigan for tire Safe Drinking Water Act. See 
MDEQ, Drinking Water, http://www.michigan.gOv/deq/0.4561.7-135-3313 3675— .00.html (last 
visited Nov. 13, 2015) (attached as Ex. 64). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 15 of 16 

Melissa Mays 
3714 Beecher Road 
Flint, MI 48503 

American Civil Liberties Union of Michigan 

2966 Woodward Avenue 

Detroit, MI 48103 

(313) 578-6814 

Attention: Michael Steinberg 

Natural Resources Defense Council 
1152 15th Street, NW, Suite 300 
Washington, DC 20005 
(202) 289-2385 

Attention: Dimple Chaudhary 

Do not hesitate to contact us if you would like to discuss this matter. 


Respectfully, 


Dimple Chaudhary /" J 

Natural Resources Defense Council 


1152 15th Street, NW, Suite 300 
Washington, DC 20005 
(202) 289-2385 


Sarah Tallman 
Anjali Waikar 
Evan Feinauer 

Natural Resources Defense Council 
20 North Wacker Drive, Suite 1600 
Chicago, IL 60606 
(312)651-7918 



American Civil Liberties Union of 
Michigan 

2966 Woodward Avenue 
Detroit, MI 48103 
(313) 578-6814 


Counsel for American Civil Liberties Union 
of Michigan 


Counsel for Concerned Pastors for Social Action, 
Melissa Mays, and Natural Resources Defense 
Council 


Enclosure 



November 16, 2015 
Page 16 of 16 

cc: 

Administrator Gina McCarthy 
U.S. EPA Headquarters 
William Jefferson Clinton Building 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Mail Code: 1101 A 
Washington, DC 20460 
McCarthy . gina@Epa. gov 

Regional Administrator Susan Hedman 

U.S. EPA Region 5 

77 West Jackson Boulevard 

Mail Code: R-19J 

Chicago, IL 60604 

Hedman.susan@Epa.gov 

Attorney General Bill Schuette 
State of Michigan 

G. Mennen Williams Building, 7th Floor 

525 W. Ottawa Street 

P.O. Box 30212 

Lansing, MI 48909 

miag@michigan. gov 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Rich Baird 

Friday, November 20, 2015 11:01 AM 
Redford, James (GOV) 

Fwd: Flint water 


Sent from my Verizon Wireless 4G LIE DROID 

Forwarded l 

From: Andy Dillon J „ . ‘I 

Date: Nov 20, 2015 10:53 AM 

Subject: Fwd: Flint water 

To: Richard Baird Tf, 

Cc: 

Will send in around 3. Its my preliminary draft. 


Andy Dillon 

Conway MacKenzie Inc. 

401 S. Old Woodward Avenue, Suite 340, Birmingham, Ml 48009 

248.433.3143 (fax) 



Forwarded message 

From: Andy Dillon 
Date: Fri, Nov 20, 2015 at 10:50 AM 
Subject: Re: FlinMwiter 



Kelly Rossman-McKinney 


Draft response 


I am providing my the comments below based on my memory of events that transpired over two years ago. I 
have not reviewed the reports, emails, memos relating to these events and my recollections would likely change 
after refreshing my memory with the relevant documents. 

First, it is important to understand Flint's decision to join the KWA was a separate and distinct decision from 
using the Flint River. After we signed off on Flint joining the KWA, Flint was to negotiate with the DWSD 
regarding using their water during the construction of the KWA. If they were unable to negotiate a fair deal, I 
recall their back up plan was to use the Flint River. I don't recall Treasury being involved in the negotiations 
with DWSD or being advised that the negotiations broke down and Flint switched to the Flint River. 


l 




Treasury held two and possibly three lengthy meetings to go over the Tucker Young report with the DEQ. The 
DEQ didn't agree with TY's report and identified several flaws in their assumptions which TY was unable to 
refute. The reason for the multiple meetings was to make sure our siding with the DEQ over TY was the correct 
decision. The reports were dependent upon engineering/construction related issues which were not the forte of 
Treasury so we relied on the advice and counsel of both TY and DEQ where the appropriate expertise resided to 
assist us in making this decision. 

TY's largest customer was the DWSD and DWSD did not like the KWA project. We didn't assume that 
factored into the TY findings but it was on our radar. We didn't believe the DEQ had any agenda so their 
conclusion together with TY's reliance on some flawed assumptions, led us to side w/ the DEQ's opinion. The 
flawed assumptions related as best I can recall on redundancy requirements that TY assumed the DEQ would 
demand which the DEQ said would not be required. Once eliminated, the TY reports findings were 
undermined. 

I recall Treasury needed to approve the EM's decision to join the KWA (again not to approve Flint using the 
Flint River). 

I recall we were getting a lot of pressure from County and City officials to approve Flint joining the KWA. The 
decision had a deadline because whether Flint joined the project affected the size of the pipe that would bring in 
the water and the KWA needed to know if Flint would participate to purchase the correct pipe size. 

I recall advising the Governor's office of these events because my initial instincts were not to authorize Flint 
joining the KWA for two reasons: 1) Flint was not in a financial position to assume any financial risk re: the 
project; and 2) Detroit was also in financial distress and I didn't think DWSD losing approximately 5% of their 
revenues was a good thing for them. 

Because I thought Treasury would go against local sentiment that heavily favored KWA, I thought the 
Governor's office should be aware of the potential political fallout. 

I also wanted the Governor's office involved because I didn't think Treasury had the expertise to make this 
decision and as such we would need help from the DEQ and I wanted them to support the collaboration between 
the two departments. 

I never received any pressure from the Governor's office to decide one way or the other on approving the 
KWA. We followed the process described above and made a decision based upon what we thought was in the 
best interests of Flint. The decision to support KWA was influenced by our conclusion that there was no 
financial risk to Flint for the project and the DEQ's conclusion that it was more economical for Flint to join 
KWA (again a separate and distinct decision from using the Flint River). The fact this conclusion was what the 
local officials wanted was a bonus. 

I don't recall specific conversations on the dates and times you referenced. I do know there were many 
discussions regarding this topic between Treasury, DEQ and the Governor's office and the facts and 
circumstances re: KWA led to a clear consensus that the state should not block Flint's desire to join the KWA. 


Andy Dillon 

Conway MacKenzie Inc. 

401 S. Old Woodward Avenue, Suite 340, Birmingham, Ml 48009 


2 



248.433.3143 (fax) 


On Thu, Nov 19, 2015 at 6:13 PM, Egan, Paul <pee a n @ fi~eepress.com> wrote: 

The story is for the weekend Andy so Friday would be OK got a response, hopefully before 4 p.m. 
Thank you, 

Paul 


Sent from my iPhone 

On Nov wrote: 

I am writing to advise I received your email. 

Based upon past experience, curious if you needed an answer today or if an answer tomorrow 
will suffice. 

Obviously, there is a trust issue lacking on my side. 

As you know, it was a long time ago so details are not all that fresh but I will consider providing 
a response to the best of my memory if the story isn’t already written. 


Andy Dillon 

Conway MacKenzie Inc. 

401 S. Old Woodward Avenue, Suite 340, Bir mingham, Ml 48009 
248.952.8868 (office) | 248.433.3143 (fax) 


On Thu, Nov 19, 2015 at 1:48 PM, Egan, Paul 



wrote: 


Hi Andy: Why did the state and city opt to go with KWA for Flint water supply when the study 
you commissioned from Tucker, Young, Jackson, Tull found that going with KWA would be 
more costly than staying with DWSD? (Here is excerpt from p. 17): 


“Based on the analysis, it is prudent to assume the KWA water supply option costs would be 
somewhere 

between the KWA-1 and KWA-2 options. Therefore, the analysis indicates that the two DWSD 
options 

of supplying 8 MGD on a maximum day and up to 8 MGD on average are the least cost options 
for Flint. 


3 






These options allow Flint to maximize the use of existing assets; the City of Flint’s (the Flint 
WTP) and 

DWSD’s (the existing 72-inch main).” 


How would you describe your role in the chain of decisions that led to Flint drawing its water 
supply from the Flint River? 


The Flint City Council opted to go with the KWA on the evening of March 25, 2013. Your 
schedule shows you had a 5 p.m. phone conversation at 5 p.m. that day with Dennis Muchmore 
“regarding Flint Water Supply alternatives.” 


The next day, March 26, 2013, your schedule shows a 9 a.m. meeting at Treasury “regarding 
Flint water, a 1:30 p.m. phone call with Dan Wyant “regarding Flint/KWA,” and a w p.m. 
meeting in Lansing with Flint Mayor Dayne Walling? 


What do you recall about these conversations/meetings? Did Muchmore sign off on the switch to 
KWA on behalf of the governor? 


Thanks, Paul Egan 
Detroit Free Press 



4 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Rich Baird 

Friday, November 20, 2015 11:12 AM 
Redford, James (GOV) 

Fwd: Freep 


Sent from my Verizon Wireless 4GLTE DROID 

Forwarded message 

From: Andy Dillon 

Date: Nov 20, 2015 11:10 AM 

Subject: Freep 

Kelly Rossman-McKinney 



Draft response (I added some health and safety comments to the prior version) 


I am providing my the comments below based on my memory of events that transpired over two years ago. I have not reviewed the reports, 
emails, memos relating to these events and my recollections would likely change after refreshing my memory with the relevant documents. 

First, it is important to understand Flint's decision to join the KWA was a separate and distinct decision from using the Flint River. After we 
signed off on Flint joining the KWA, Flint was to negotiate with the DWSD regarding using their water during the construction of the 
KWA. If they were unable to negotiate a fair deal, I recall their back up plan was to use the Flint River. I don't recall Treasury being 
involved in the negotiations with DWSD or being advised that the negotiations broke down and Flint switched to the Flint River. I don't 
recall any discussions that suggested there would be a safety risk associated with the decision to join the KWA. Again, because using the 
Flint River was not before Treasury whether there were health and safety issues associated with that decision was not before Treasury. 

Treasury held two and possibly three lengthy meetings to go over the Tucker Young report with the DEQ. The DEQ didn't agree with TY's 
report and identified several flaws in their assumptions which TY was unable to refute. The reason for the multiple meetings was to make 
sure our siding with the DEQ over TY was the correct decision. The reports were dependent upon engineering/construction related issues 
which were not the forte of Treasury so we relied on the advice and counsel of both TY and DEQ where the appropriate expertise resided to 
assist us in making this decision. 

TY's largest customer was the DWSD and DWSD did not like the KWA project. We didn't assume that factored into the TY findings but it 
was on our radar. We didn't believe the DEQ had any agenda so their conclusion together with TY's reliance on some flawed assumptions, 
led us to side w/ the DEQ's opinion. The flawed assumptions related as best I can recall on redundancy requirements that TY assumed the 
DEQ would demand which the DEQ said would not be required. Once eliminated, the TY reports findings were undermined. 

I recall Treasury needed to approve the EM's decision to join the KWA (again not to approve Flint using the Flint River). 

I recall we were getting a lot of pressure from County and City officials to approve Flint joining the KWA. The decision had a deadline 
because whether Flint joined the project affected the size of the pipe that would bring in the water and the KWA needed to know if Flint 
would participate to purchase the correct pipe size. 

I recall advising the Governor's office of these events because my initial instincts were not to authorize Flint joining the KWA for two 
reasons: 1) Flint was not in a financial position to assume any financial risk re: the project; and 2) Detroit was also in financial distress and I 
didn't think DWSD losing approximately 5% of their revenues was a good thing for them. 

Because I thought Treasury would go against local sentiment that heavily favored KWA, I thought the Governor's office should be aware of 
the potential political fallout. 

I also wanted the Governor's office involved because I didn't think Treasury had the expertise to make this decision and as such we would 
need help from the DEQ and I wanted them to support the collaboration between the two departments. 


1 



I never received any pressure from the Governor's office to decide one way or the other on approving the KWA. We followed the process 
described above and made a decision based upon what we thought was in the best interests of Flint. The decision to support KWA was 
influenced by the absence of any health and safety risks raised by our advisors and our conclusion that there was no financial risk to Flint for 
the project and the DEQ's conclusion that it was more economical for Flint to join KWA (again a separate and distinct decision from using 
the Flint River). The fact this outcome was what the local officials wanted was a bonus from Treasury's perspective. 

I don't recall specific conversations on the dates and times you referenced. I do know there were many discussions regarding this topic 
between Treasury, DEQ and the Governor's office and the facts and circumstances re: KWA led to a clear consensus there was no articulated 
reason to block Flint's desire to join the KWA. 

Andy Dillon 

Conway MacKenzie Inc. 

401 S. Old Woodward Avenue, Suite 340, Birmingham, Ml 48009 

248.433.3143 (fax) 



2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Monday, December 07, 2015 3:53 PM 
Redford, James (GOV) 

Attorney Client Privileged document--FW: Flint Water Advisory Task Force 
Recommendation 

KRS version of Snyder Letter 2 (l).docx 


Follow Up Flag: 
Flag Status: 


Follow up 
Flagged 


FY! 

From: Ken Sikkema fmaijto:ksikkema@pscinc.eorril 

Sent: Monday, December 07, 2015 3:31 PM 
To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

Cc: Chris Kolb; Matt Davis; Lawrence Reynolds; Eric Rothstein; Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Subject: Flint Water Advisory Task Force Recommendation 

Dear Governor Snyder: 

We want to thank you for the recent conference call between members of the Flint Water Advisory Task Force 
(FWATF), yourself, and members of your administration. Attached is a follow-up letter to that conference call 
outlining an initial set of recommendations that we believe should be implemented in the very near future to 
focus the state's efforts to protect the public health in Flint. 

We both acknowledge and appreciate your personal interest in this issue and your commitment, not only to 
assisting the Task Force in our review, but— most importantly— to ensuring that the foil measure of state 
resources are brought forward to protect the public health in Flint and throughout the state. 

Respectfully, 

Ken Sikkema 


Ken Sikkema 
Senior Policy Fellow 
Public Sector Consultants 



ksikk ema@.psci nc . com 


l 


December 7, 2015 


Dear Governor Snyder: 


On Wednesday, November 18, 2015, the Flint Water Advisory Task Force met with representatives of 
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) and the Michigan Department of Health 
and Fluman Services ( M DH HS) to discuss elements of the 10-point Action Plan designed to address 
various issues related to the ongoing public health protection challenges precipitated by lead in the Flint 
water supply. These discussions were held at our request as part of our task to make recommendations 
to prevent a similar occurrence in Flint or elsewhere, and also to monitor ongoing mitigation efforts. 

Subsequent to those meetings, on Tuesday, November 24, 2015, members of the Task Force 
participated in a conference call with yourself, members of the Administration, and representatives of 
these agencies to discuss the progress to date on the 10-point Action Plan, as well as several other 
related issues. 

We want to acknowledge the steps that have already been taken to implement the action plan, 
specifically in the areas of outreach efforts to facilitate blood lead testing for children, communication 
with health care providers in the Flint community about the importance of testing children for lead, and 
the training of additional public health nurses in the Genesee County Flealth Department. We do 
believe, however, that additional steps need to be taken to reach additional children for blood lead 
testing, assure proper follow-up with children found to have elevated blood lead levels, and to continue 
water testing. We will continue to assess state and local efforts and make recommendations regarding 
specific steps that we believe are warranted. 

One primary concern we have at this point is that the current efforts appear to be taking place in the 
absence of a larger project coordination framework that measures results and clearly delineates 
responsibilities for continuing actions to protect public health. We believe the state is best positioned to 
facilitate this larger framework, which should address the following: 

1. The need for MDFIFIS and MDEQ— and, possibly, other state agencies--to set goals for actions in 
collaboration with local and federal agencies and organizations. 

2. The need for a set of corresponding timelines for the goals. 

3. The need to establish responsibility for meeting the goals in a timely fashion and for 
contingency plans for the state if the goals are not being met. 

4. The need for clear, regular communication with the Flint community and stakeholder groups 
regarding action steps and updates. 

We also believe it important that a single person or entity— potentially independent of any one 
particular state agency and mutually agreeable to this Task Force and you, Governor— be established to 
provide effective coordination of ongoing activities and reporting on the status of mitigation measures. 
For this, we also believe a readily understood "dashboard" should be developed that reports on the 
goals, timelines and assignments. This will enable members of the Flint community, public health 
providers, and state agencies to know about the status of the Flint water crisis mitigation program, as 
well as promote coordination and accountability. The Task Force is prepared to assist in the 
development of that dashboard. 



We believe it is vitally important that trusted members of the Flint community be engaged in 
communication on this issue, as well as the distribution of information conveyed by our suggested 
dashboard reporting. Accordingly, in advance of our final report, we would like to ensure the 
independent coordinator suggested above engage trusted community groups to begin rebuilding 
community trust in state actions. 

We appreciate your personal interest in this issue, commitment to assisting the Task Force in our 
review, and— most importantly— commitment to ensuring that the full measure of state resources are 
brought forward to protect the public health in Flint and throughout the state. 

Respectfully yours, 


Flint Water Advisory Task Force: 

Dr. Matt Davis 

Chris Kolb 

Dr. Larry Reynolds 

Eric Rothstein 

Ken Sikkema 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 


Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Monday, December 28, 2015 6:01 PM 

Redford, James (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: Letter to the Governor 


I would suggest a concall with us tonight. 

Sent from my Verizon Wireless 4G LIE DROID 

Forwarded message 

From: Ken Sikkema 

Date: Dec 28, 2015 4:34 PM 

Subject: Letter to the Governor 

To: "Baird, Richard (GOV)" < bairdr@.michi gan, gov > 

Cc: Chris Kolb 

Rich: 

I want to give you a heads up: the Task Force will be sending a letter to the Governor tomorrow am that states 
the primary — not the only, but certainly the primary— responsibility for the Flint Water crisis lies at the feet of 
the MDEQ. We will address three failures: (1) regulatory culture in the Office of Drinking Water and Municipal 
Assistance; (2) inappropriate and unacceptable public response; and (3) inadequate application of the Lead and 
Copper Rule. 

We address the critical and urgent need to establish responsibility and hold individuals accountable as soon as 
possible. 

It is our intent to send the letter via email tomorrow, with a public release Wednesday am... 

The Task Force— both individually and collectively— feel strongly about the need for us to be on record now 
rather than later. 

Don't hesitate to contact me if you have any questions. 

Ken Sikkema 


Ken Sikkema 
Senior Policy Fellow 


l 



ltants 



2 


From: 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: 

Monday, December 28, 2015 6:03 PM 

To: 

Baird, Richard (GO V) 

Cc: 

Redford, James (GOV); Holland, Meegan (GO V); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Letter to the Governor 


Yes, let's talk asap. 

On Dec 28, 2015, at 6:00 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) <balrdr @m i chigan . go v> wrote: 
I would suggest a concall with us tonight. 


Sent from my Verizon Wireless 4G LTE DROID 

Forwarded message 

From: Ken S ikkema 

Date: Dec 28, 2015 4:34 PM 

Subject: Letter to the Governor 

To: "Baird, Ric hard (GOV)" <bairdr@michman.s;ov> 

Cc: Chris Kolb 

Rich: 

I want to give you a heads up: the Task Force will be sending a letter to the Governor tomorrow 
am that states the primary — not the only, but certainly the primary— responsibility for the Flint 
Water crisis lies at the feet of the MDEQ. We will address three failures: (1) regulatory culture in 
the Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance; (2) inappropriate and unacceptable 
public response; and (3) inadequate application of the Lead and Copper Rule. 

We address the critical and urgent need to establish responsibility and hold individuals 
accountable as soon as possible. 

It is our intent to send the letter via email tomorrow, with a public release Wednesday am... 

The Task Force— both individually and collectively— feel strongly about the need for us to be on 
record now rather than later. 

Don't hesitate to contact me if you have any questions. 

Ken Sikkema 


l 



Ken Sikkema 
Senior Policy Fellow 
Public Sector Consultants 



2 


From: Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, December 28, 2015 6:23 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: Redford, James (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: RE: Letter to the Governor 


Hi all, 

It sounds like everyone can make a conference call at 6:45 p.m, -• yes, in about 20 minutes. 


Regards, 

Meegan 


From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, December 28, 2015 6:03 PM 
To: Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@rriichigan.gov > 

Cc: Redford, James (GOV) < RedfordJ@mgchigan.gov >; Holland, Meegan (GOV) < Holl3ndM2@michlgan.gov >; Hollins, 
Harvey (GOV) < hoUinsh@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Re: Letter to the Governor 

Yes, let's talk asap. 

On Dec 28, 2015, at 6:00 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) <hairdr @ michigan.gov> wrote: 

I would suggest a concall with us tonight. 

Sent from my Verizon Wireless 4G LIE DROID 

Forwarded message 

From: Ken Sikkemag^gH ^^^^B^gaMm 

Date: Dec 28, 2015 4:34 PM 

Subject: Letter to the Governor 

To: "Baird, Richard (GOV)" < bairdr@,michi gan . gov > 

Cc: Chris Kolb 

i Rich: 

i I want to give you a heads up: the Task Force will be sending a letter to the Governor tomorrow 
! am that states the primary — not the only, but certainly the primary— responsibility for the Flint 
! Water crisis lies at the feet of the MDEQ. We will address three failures: (1) regulatory culture 
i in the Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance; (2) inappropriate and unacceptable 
i public response; and (3) inadequate application of the Lead and Copper Rule. 

| We address the critical and urgent need to establish responsibility and hold individuals 
i accountable as soon as possible. 


l 





It is our intent to send the letter via email tomorrow, with a public release Wednesday am... 

The Task Force— both individually and collectively— feel strongly about the need for us to be on 
record now rather than later. 

Don't hesitate to contact me if you have any questions. 

Ken Sikkema 


Ken Sikkema 
Senior Policy Fellow 
Public Sector Consultants 



2 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Monday, December 28, 2015 6:54 PM 

Baird, Richard (GOV); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Redford, James 

(GOV) 

letter 

Snyder Letter EPR v5-Clean.docx; ATT00001.txt 


l 



Dear Governor Snyder: 


The Flint Water Advisory Task Force, which you appointed on October 21, 2015, has devoted 
considerable effort and countless hours to our review of the contamination of the Flint water supply: 
what happened, why it occurred, and what is needed to prevent a recurrence in Flint or elsewhere in 
the state. We have also been assessing ongoing mitigation efforts to help assure that short- and long- 
term public health issues and water management concerns will be properly addressed to safeguard the 
health and well being of the Flint community. 

Shortly after we began our work, we recognized the immediate need for better coordination of the 
state's response to the ongoing public health issues in Flint, and for assignment of a single person to 
provide this coordination. We addressed these concerns in a letter to you on December 7, 2015, and you 
responded with immediate adoption of these recommendations. We thank you for the commitment 
your response demonstrates. 

In our continuing efforts, we have now interviewed numerous individuals at state and local levels; 
reviewed many documents, articles, and emails; and deliberated repeatedly as a group. Both individually 
and as a group, we have visited Flint several times during the past several weeks to meet with citizens, 
public health officials and healthcare providers, individuals who have water management 
responsibilities at the city and county levels, and other public officials. 

It is clear to us, particularly as we listen to the people of Flint, that it is both critical and urgent to 
establish responsibility for what happened in their community and to ensure accountability. This is a 
first step in a long process to re-establish the trust they no longer have in their government and the 
agencies whose responsibility it is to protect their health. It is urgent because this deep distrust of 
government continues to compromise the effective delivery of protective services designed to address 
ongoing public health issues. It is for these reasons that we are sending this letter at this time. 

We believe the primary responsibility for what happened in Flint rests with the Michigan Department 
of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). Although many individuals and entities at state and local levels 
contributed to creating and prolonging the problem, MDEQ is the government agency that has 
responsibility to ensure safe drinking water in Michigan. It failed in that responsibility and must be 
held accountable for that failure. 

The Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) places responsibility for compliance with its requirements on the 
public water system. In this instance, the City of Flint had the responsibility to operate its water system 
within SDWA requirements, under the jurisdiction of the MDEQ. The role of the MDEQ is to ensure 
compliance with the SDWA through its regulatory oversight as the primary agency having enforcement 
responsibility for the Flint water system. 

The MDEQ failed in three fundamental ways. 

Regulatory Failure 

We believe that in the Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance (ODWMA) at MDEQ, a culture 
exists in which "technical compliance" is considered sufficient to ensure safe drinking water in Michigan. 
This minimalist approach to regulatory and oversight responsibility is unacceptable and simply 
insufficient to the task of public protection. It led to MDEQ's failure to recognize a number of indications 
that switching the water source in Flint would— and did— compromise both water safety and water 
quality. The MDEQ made a number of decisions that were, and continue to be, justified on the basis that 
federal rules "allowed" those decisions to be made. ODWMA must adopt a posture that is driven not by 



this minimalist technical compliance approach, but rather by one that is founded on what needs to be 
done to assure drinking water safety. 


A culture change must occur within ODWMA. It must be driven by a mission that is aspirational 
regarding the role of the MDEQ in ensuring the safety and the quality of Michigan's drinking water. We 
believe, and have expressed to MDEQ Director Dan Wyant, that as a Great Lakes State, Michigan should 
aspire to have the safest drinking water in the nation, rather than merely aiming for technical 
compliance with regulatory requirements. 

Failure in Substance and Tone of MDEQ Response to the Public 

Throughout 2015, as the public raised concerns and as independent studies and testing were conducted 
and brought to the attention of MDEQ, the agency's response was often one of aggressive dismissal, 
belittlement, and attempts to discredit these efforts and the individuals involved. We find both the tone 
and substance of many MDEQ public statements to be completely unacceptable. In a real way, the 
MDEQ represents the public, including the very individuals it treated dismissively and disrespectfully in 
public statements. We recognize that the agency might disagree with the opinions of others on a variety 
of issues, including testing protocol, interpretation of testing results, the requirements of federal law 
and rules, and other matters. What is disturbing about MDEQ's responses, however, is their persistent 
tone of scorn and derision. In fact, the MDEQ seems to have been more determined to discredit the 
work of others— who ultimately proved to be right— than to pursue its own oversight responsibility. 

Failure in MDEQ Interpretation of the Lead and Copper Rule 

The federal Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) is central to what happened in Flint, because that rule, at least 
theoretically, is designed to prevent lead and copper contamination of drinking water. The federal LCR 
calls for "optimized corrosion control treatment," which the MDEQ did not require in the switch to the 
Flint River. Prior to the switch, MDEQ staff instructed City of Flint water treatment staff that corrosion 
control treatment (CCT) was not necessary until two six-month monitoring periods had been conducted. 
The need for CCT would be evaluated after the results from those two monitoring periods were 
reviewed. The decision not to require CCT, made at the direction of the MDEQ, led directly to the 
contamination of the Flint water system. 

The MDEQ seems to have taken different positions on whether it faithfully followed the LCR in the Flint 
situation. It first maintained that it followed the LCR, then stated that it did not follow the rule properly, 
and most recently claimed that a federal memorandum issued by the US EPA in early November 2015 
suggests that the original MDEQ interpretation was possibly correct. 

We are not convinced. Even the MDEQ's latest interpretation of the US EPA's November memorandum 
is overly legalistic and misunderstands the intent of the LCR, which is to minimize risks of lead and 
copper exposure for human health. 

We believe ODWMA's single-minded legalistic focus is the heart of the problem, and it is part of the 
"technical compliance" culture described above. ODWMA should not be basing its actions solely on a 
legally possible interpretation of the LCR. It should be focusing on how to protect Michigan's citizens 
from lead in drinking water. 

We met with MDEQ Director Wyant on December 16, 2015, to discuss these issues, as well as many 
others. We note his substantial agreement with many of our conclusions, particularly as it relates to the 
regulatory failure and the abysmal public response of his agency. It is our understanding that he has 
drawn similar conclusions in his own evaluation of the MDEQ's role in the Flint water crisis. At the same 





time, it was disappointing to hear his weak defense of the CCT decision based on the EPA's November 
2015 memorandum. 


We are not finished with our work. Other individuals and entities made poor decisions, contributing to 
and prolonging the contamination of the drinking water supply in Flint. As an example, we are 
particularly concerned by recent revelations of MDHHS's apparent early knowledge of, yet silence 
about, elevated blood lead levels detected among Flint's children. We also feel it important to further 
review local government decision processes under emergency management. Our final report will 
highlight and discuss those concerns, among many others, to provide some context to a comprehensive 
series of recommendations. As stated earlier in this letter, however, we believe that establishing 
responsibility is a critical and urgent need, and one that should not wait for our final report in 2016 . 
Individuals and agencies responsible must be held accountable in a timely fashion. 

It is our hope that the heightened awareness of the dangers of lead poisoning can be an opportunity to 
make Michigan safer, particularly for its children. Drinking water must be recognized as a potential 
source of health risk exposure when water lines and fixtures containing lead are disturbed or 
compromised. Proper testing, not only in high-risk areas but also in facilities serving children (e.g., 
schools), must be considered. Facilitating long-term financing of a model public health program, and 
also replacement of lead-containing water service lines and fixtures, would enable Michigan to realize a 
positive lasting legacy from the tragedy of the Flint water crisis. Our final report will address some of 
these issues. 

The City of Flint's water customers— fellow Michigan citizens— were needlessly and tragically exposed to 
toxic levels of lead through their drinking water supply. They deserve a commitment to properly assess 
responsibility and ensure accountability. They also deserve a commitment to needed mitigation in both 
the short and long term. The Flint water crisis never should have happened. Flaving failed to prevent it, 
state government should coordinate a sustained, public-health-focused response to remedy, to the 
fullest extent possible, the impacts on the Flint community. 

Respectfully yours, 

Flint Water Advisory Task Force: 

Ken Sikkema 
Chris Kolb 
Matt Davis 
Larry Reynolds 
Eric Rothstein 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Monday, December 28, 2015 8:22 PM 
Redford, James (GOV) 

CONFIDENTIAL ATTORNEY CLIENT COMMUNICATION: Flint water 


Jim - Thoughts before you send this on? - Meegan 

"When I became aware that the city of Flint's water showed elevated lead levels and that many questioned the state's 
handling of the situation, I appointed an independent task force to shine a bright light on how the situation evolved and 
how any missteps occurred. The task force has done its job without interference. It so far has reviewed stacks of 
documents and interviewed scores of Flint, Genesee County, state and federal officials, all while keeping me apprised of 
its progress. Even though the task force's final report may not occur for another month, it has made me aware of some 
initial findings that call for immediate corrective steps in order to restore trust in how the state keeps its citizens safe 
and informed. 

"No matter what the testing requirements were, they were not enough to prevent this crisis. It's clear we should have 
listened better and put safeguards in place more quickly. 

Due to these conclusions, I'm accepting the resignation of MDEQ Director Dan Wyant, and three DEQ employees directly 
involved with some of the problems cited by the task force. 

"And that's not all. I understand there can be disagreements within the scientific community. That is why I have 
directed both the departments of Environmental Quality and Health and Human Services to invite every external 
scientist who has worked on the Flint water issue to be partners in helping us improve Flint water. Let's share research 
on water and blood lead level testing to arrive at the most accurate conclusions. Together, we should be able to affirm 
that we're using the very best testing protocols to ensure Flint residents have safe drinking water and that we're doing 
proper monitoring and remediation of health impacts over the short and long term. 

"I want the Flint community to know how very sorry I am that this has happened. And I want all Michigan citizens to 
know that we will learn from this experience, because Flint is not the only city that has an aging infrastructure 
containing lead lines. 

"But I know apologies aren't enough. That's why I'm taking the actions today to create a culture of openness and 
empathy. We've already allocated $10 million to test the water, distribute water filters, and help in other ways. Last 
week, I called Flint Mayor Karen Weaver, and we're going to meet soon to discuss other ways the state can offer 
assistance. 

"These are only initial steps - we fully expect to take more actions following the recommendations of our task force. 
When it comes to matters of health and quality of life, we're committed to doing everything we can to protect the well- 
being of our citizens." 


Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 
Office: 517-335-6397 



Twitter: @meholland 


l 



From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 29, 2015 11:28 AM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV); Redford, James (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Subject: RE: CONFIDENTIAL ATTORNEY CLIENT COMMUNICATION - DRAFT DOCUMENT - 

Flint water 


Below are my edits: 


“When I became aware that the city of Flint’s water showed elevated lead levels and that many the state’s 
handling of the situation was being questioned, \ made the decision to request funding from the legislature to 
switch Flint off the Flint River back to the Great Lakes Water Authority until the completion of the new 
pipeline, I then appointed an independent task force to investigate how the situation evolved and identify 
missteps and areas for improvement. 

The task force is doing an exceptional job and has been relentless in focusing on the facts. It so far has reviewed 
stacks of documents and interviewed scores of Flint, Genesee County, state and federal officials, and keeping 
me and my team apprised of its progress. 

Although the task force’s final report is not yet completed, it has made me aware of some interim findings and 
corrective steps that 1 have decided to take immediately in order to restore trust in how the state keeps its 
citizens safe and informed. 

“No matter what the testing requirements were, they were not enough to prevent this situation. Moving forward 
w e will list e n intently and b e mor e r e sponsiv e to community n ee ds. 

"Alter much consideration, reinforced by the strong recommendation of the task force, I am accepting the 
resignation of MDEQ Director Dan Wyant, and have made other personnel changes in MDEQ to address 
problems cited by the task force. 

I understand there can be disagreements within the scientific community. That is why I have directed both the 
departments of Environmental Quality and Health and Human Services to invite every external scientist who 
has worked on the Flint water issue to be our partners in helping us improve Flint water. I believe open sourcing 
data on water and blood lead level testing to arrive at accurate and mutually supported conclusions is a better 
way. Together, we should work to affirm that we’re using the very best testing protocols to ensure Flint 
residents have safe drinking water and that we’re doing proper monitoring and remediation of health impacts 
over the short and long term. 


“I want the Flint community to know how very sorry I am that this has happened. And I want all Michigan 
citizens to know that we will learn from this experience, because Flint is not the only city that has an aging 
infrastructure containing lead lines. 


l 



“But changes in leadership and staff, and apologies are not enough. That’s why I’m taking the actions today to 
ensure a culture of openness and trust. We’ve already allocated $10 million to test the water, distribute water 
filters, and help in other ways. Last week, I called Flint Mayor Karen Weaver, and we’re going to meet soon to 
discuss other ways the state can offer assistance. 


“These are only initial steps - we fully expect to take more actions following the recommendations of our task 
force. When it comes to matters of health and quality of life, we’re committed to doing everything we can to 
protect the well-being of our citizens.” 


From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, December 28, 2015 9:09 PM 

To: Redford, James (GOV) <RedfordJ@michigan.gov> 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Holland, Meegan (GOV) <HollandM2@michigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) <hollinsh@michigan.gov> 

Subject: Re: CONFIDENTIAL ATTORNEY CLIENT COMMUNICATION - DRAFT DOCUMENT - Flint water 

Some wordsmith and editing thoughts. Not my power Lane. Use as you see fit. 

Rich 

Please pass this on to the appropriate folks. Thanks Jim! - Meegan 


“When I became aware that the city of Flint’s water showed elevated lead levels and that many the state’s 
handling of the situation was being questioned, I appointed an independent task force to investigate how the 
situation evolved and identify missteps and areas for improvement. 

The task force has done an exceptional job and has been relentless in focusing on the facts. It so far has 
reviewed stacks of documents and interviewed scores of Flint, Genesee County, state and federal officials, and 
keeping me and my team apprised of its progress. 

Although the task force’s final report is not yet completed, it has made me aware of some interim findings and 
corrective steps that I have decided to take immediately in order to restore trust in how the state keeps its 
citizens safe and informed. 


“No matter what the testing requirements were, they were not enough to prevent this situation. Moving forward 
we will listen intently and be more responsive to community needs. 


"I am accepting the resignation of MDEQ Director Dan Wyant, and have made other personnel changes to 
address problems cited by the task force. 


2 



But, changes in leadership and staff are not enough. I understand there can be disagreements within the 
scientific community. That is why I have directed both the departments of Environmental Quality and Health 
and Human Services to invite every external scientist who has worked on the Flint water issue to be our partners 
in helping us improve Flint water. Let’s share research on water and blood lead level testing to arrive at accurate 
and mutually supported conclusions. Together, we should work to affirm that we’re using the very best testing 
protocols to ensure Flint residents have safe drinking water and that we’re doing proper monitoring and 
remediation of health impacts over the short and long term. 


“I want the Flint community to know how very sorry I am that this has happened. And I want all Michigan 
citizens to know that we will learn from this experience, because Flint is not the only city that has an aging 
infrastructure containing lead lines. 


“But I know apologies aren’t enough. That’s why Fm taking the actions today to ensure a culture of openness 
and trust. We’ve already allocated $10 million to test the water, distribute water filters, and help in other ways. 
Last week, I called Flint Mayor Karen Weaver, and we’re going to meet soon to discuss other ways the state can 
offer assistance. 


“These are only initial steps - we fully expect to take more actions following the recommendations of our task 
force. When it comes to matters of health and quality of life, we’re committed to doing everything we can to 
protect the well-being of our citizens.” 


Sent from my Verizon Wireless 4G LIE DROID 

On Dec 28, 2015 8:42 PM, "Redford, James (GOV)" <Redford J @m ichi g a n. go v> wrote: 
New Draft. 


Sent from my iPad 
Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Holland, Meegan (GOV)" <Holla.ndM2 @ michi ga n . go v> 

Date: December 28, 2015 at 8:37:43 PM EST 

To: "Redford, James (GOV)" < Redford J@m ichi gan, gov > 

Subject: CONFIDENTIAL ATTORNEY CLIENT COMMUNICATION - Flint water 

Please pass this on to the appropriate folks. Thanks Jim! - Meegan 


3 



“When I became aware that the city of Flint’s water showed elevated lead levels and that many 
questioned the state’s handling of the situation, I appointed an independent task force to shine a 
bright light on how the situation evolved and how any missteps may have occurred. The task 
force has done its job without interference. It so far has reviewed stacks of documents and 
interviewed scores of Flint, Genesee County, state and federal officials, all while keeping me 
apprised of its progress. Even though the task force’s final report may not occur for another 
month, it has made me aware of some initial findings that call for immediate corrective steps in 
order to restore trust in how the state keeps its citizens safe and informed. 


“No matter what the testing requirements were, they were not enough to prevent this situation. 
Moving forward we will listen better and be more responsive to community needs. 


“Due to these observations, I’m accepting the resignation of MDEQ Director Dan Wyant, and 
three DEQ employees directly involved with some of the problems cited by the task force. 


“And that’s not all. I understand there can be disagreements within the scientific 
community. That is why I have directed both the departments of Environmental Quality and 
Health and Human Services to invite every external scientist who has worked on the Flint water 
issue to be partners in helping us improve Flint water. Let’s share research on water and blood 
lead level testing to arrive at the most accurate conclusions. Together, we should be able to 
affirm that we’re using the very best testing protocols to ensure Flint residents have safe 
drinking water and that we’re doing proper monitoring and remediation of health impacts over 
the short and long term. 


“I want the Flint community to know how very sorry I am that this has happened. And I want 
all Michigan citizens to know that we will learn from this experience, because Flint is not the 
only city that has an aging infrastructure containing lead lines. 


“But I know apologies aren’t enough. That’s why I’m taking the actions today to create a 
culture of openness and empathy. We’ve already allocated $10 million to test the water, 
distribute water filters, and help in other ways. Last week, I called Flint Mayor Karen Weaver, 
and we’re going to meet soon to discuss other ways the state can offer assistance. 


“These are only initial steps - we fully expect to take more actions following the 
recommendations of our task force. When it comes to matters of health and quality of life, we’re 
committed to doing everything we can to protect the well-being of our citizens.” 


4 



Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 


Office: 517-335-6397 


Mobile: 


Twitter: @meholland 


Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 
Office: 517-335-6397 
Mobile: *1 

Twitter: @meholland 


5 




From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 29, 2015 1:59 PM 
Redford, James (GOV) 

RE: Here's what's going to executive staff 


it's going out to our executive staff to our executive staff at 2:30. when the release goes out. Up to you whether you 
trust the situation enough to send it earlier than that. 

Meegan 


From: Redford, James (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 29, 2015 1:54 PM 

To: Holland, Meegan (GOV) < HoHandM2@triichigan.gov > 

Subject: Re: Here's what's going to executive staff 

Ok. Let me know 
When I can send. 

Thx ? 

J 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Dec 29, 2015, at 1:48 PM, Holland, Meegan (GOV) < Holiar;dM2@rnichigar;.gov > wrote: 

This would be the better version to share with your AG counterpart - it's Jarrod's note to executive staff 
that will go out soon. - Meegan 


Team, 

As you are aware, we have been working closely with the independent task force that has been 
reviewing state, local and federal actions regarding the serious health issues related to water in Flint. 

Although the task force's final report is not yet complete, members have made the Governor aware of 
some interim findings, and there are interim steps the Governor has decided to take immediately in 
order to restore trust in how we in state government keep residents safe and informed. 

As part of this process, Dan Wyant, director of the Department of Environmental Quality, has offered his 
resignation, and Governor has reluctantly determined to accept it. There are likely to be other personnel 
changes in MDEQas well. 

I want to thank Dan for his service. He has been the DEQ director since the start of the administration, 
and previously headed the Agriculture Department under both Gov. Engler and Gov. Granholm. He is 
passionate about public service and protecting our state's environment. 


l 



The situation in Flint is serious and challenging. We will continue work closely with the task force and 
city leaders as we move forward, committed to protecting the health of people living in Flint and around 
our state. 

Sincerely, 

Jarrod Agen 


Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 

Office: 517-335-6397 

Mobile: 

Twitter: @meholland 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Michael H. Dettmer 

Wednesday, December 30, 2015 8:49 AM 
Redford, James (GOV) 

MDEQ - Flint water 

EPA Beyond the Horizonl995.pdf 


Jim: First, Flappy New Year. Hopefully you and the Governor and administration have a successful 2016. I think he 
made the right move yesterday to recognize and acknowledge the seriousness of what may have been to DEQ staff, just 
another decision to allow cost savings in the face of health and now serious economic consequences. Though in 
different parties, I have and I think those of us at FLOW have looked at the Governor as another potential Bill Milliken in 
terms of his environmental conscience and desire for a pro-environment legacy. I am old enough to recall how 
Governor Milliken reacted to the PBB Farm Bureau disaster in 1973 when the chemical was accidentally mislabeled and 
sold to feed cattle. I suggest then Governor Milliken was candid in acknowledging that his administration's reaction was 
too little too late but he in fact then acted in terms of restoring confidence by redoubling his efforts to place Michigan's 
environment in the forefront of state issues , including re-education of the state's business community. I would hope 
Governor Snyder would do the same and I think yesterday was a start. Please extend FLOW'S congratulations and 
support. I also attach a 1995 EPA report by its Science Advisory Board. I suggest though the report is 20 years old, its 
recommendations on drinking water found at page 31 remain fully viable and something the administration might look 
at, update and implement. Still hope to see you and catch up one of these days. Cordially, Mike 


l 






January 1 995 
EPA-SAB-EC- 


Science 

Board 


Advisory 


United States 

Environmental: 

Agency 


Protection 



“ If we could first know where we are and 
whither we are tending, we could better judge 
what to do, and how to do it.” 

-Abraham Lincoln 


T he Science Advisory Board (SAB) is a Congressionally-mandated, independent group 
of scientists, engineers, and other professionals who provide technical advice and 
information to the Administrator and other officials of the Environmental Protec- 
tion Agency (EPA). The value of SAB’s advice is a function of its independence from the 
Agency and the highly-qualified, balanced expertise it can apply to technical questions. 

In most cases, the SAB assesses scientific or engineering issues related to environmental 
problems of immediate concern to EPA. On occasion, however, past EPA Administrators and 
the Congress have requested the SAB’s formal opinion on matters related to EPA’s future 
operations, research needs, management priorities, and budgets. In such cases, the SAB has 
provided advice with an explicitly future-oriented policy dimension. 

For example, in September 1988 the SAB issued Future Risk: Research Strategies for the 
1990s, which recommended ways to strengthen EPA’s research capabilities and increase the 
emphasis on long-term research. In September 1990 the SAB released Reducing Risk: Setting 
Priorities and Strategies for Environmental Protection, which recommended that the Agency use 
relative risk to shape a more integrated, prioritized approach to environmental protection. 

This report. Beyond the Horizon: Using Foresight to Protect the Environmental Future, also 
contains SAB findings and recommendations that have broad, future-oriented policy impli- 
cations. The contents of this report reflect the findings and recommendations of the SAB, 
and they are not necessarily the views of EPA or any other Federal agency. 


Cover photograph courtesy of the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (NASA) 







Beyond The Horizon: 

Using Foresight To Protect 
The Environmental Future 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Science Advisory Board 
Environmental Futures Committee 
January 1995 


Printed on Recyc/ed Paper 



Letter to the Administrator 


January 15, 1995 Science Advisory Board 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Washington, DC 20460 


Ms. Carol Browner 
Administrator 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Washington, DC 20460 

Dear Ms. Browner: 

The Science Advisory Board is pleased to present to you 
our most recent report, Beyond the Horizon: Using Foresight 
to Protect Our Environmental Future. Prepared by the 
Environmental Futures Committee with the assistance 
of several SAB standing committees, this report responds 
to a request from you and Assistant Administrator David 
Gardiner to advise the Agency on ways to prepare for 
environmental problems that may emerge in the 21st 
century. 

In the past, EPA’s response to environmental problems 
has been driven by environmental deterioration, 
widespread public concern, Federal law, or a combination 
of the three. In virtually all cases, EPA has acted to reduce 
environmental threats that were immediate or near-term. 

The SAB believes, however, that there is value for 
EPA, and for a prudent nation, in anticipating problems 
that may emerge in the future, and, if necessary, taking 
action in the present to reduce them or to avoid them 
entirely. The benefits of foresight are economic (as the 
costs of solving problems are reduced), environmental 
(as environmental losses are avoided), and social (as 
environmental debts are not passed on to future 
generations). For these reasons, the SAB in this report 
recommends that EPA, working with other appropriate 


organizations both inside and outside the government, 
develop a “futures” capability, a capability to anticipate 
future environmental conditions and analyze the actions 
needed to improve them. 

The members of the Environmental Futures 
Committee recognize that EPA often is criticized for 
overreacting to immediate environmental problems, and 
for imposing costs out of proportion to the environmental 
risks involved. Such criticisms are likely to be directed at 
any Agency effort to anticipate possible future problems, 
or propose actions to address them before they emerge. 

Nevertheless, such a futures capability is desirable. In 
this report the SAB is not predicting that particular 
environmental problems will emerge in the future, nor 
are we suggesting the kinds or extent of the actions that 
EPA should take in the near term to avoid them. Rather, 
we strongly suggest that EPA should include, among its 
repertoire of technical and analytical skills, a capability 
to routinely and systematically study the range of possible 
environmental futures ahead, and advise the nation on 
possible actions in response. 

All Americans-those of us alive today, and those of 
us to come-would be well served by this attentiveness 
to the future. 


Sincerely, Dr. Raymond Loehr 

Chair, Environmental Futures Committee 

Dr. Genevieve Matanoski 
Chair, Science Advisory Board 



Contents 


Executive Summary 

1. Why Think About the Future? 1 

2. The Environmental Futures Committee 3 

3. A System of Inquiry 3 

4. Beyond the Florizon 5 

5. The Recommendations 5 

Findings on Environmental Futures 

1- The Forces of Change 7 

2. Current Uses of Foresight 9 

3. Foresight Methodologies 11 

4. The Value-and Uncertainty-of Foresight 12 

5. Possible Emerging Problem Areas 13 

6. The Environment: A Strategic 

National Interest 17 

7. Thinking of Futures at EPA 18 

Recommendations On Environmental Futures 

Recommendation i 21 

Recommendation 2 22 

Recommendation 3 22 

Recommendation 4 25 

Recommendation 5 29 



Science Advisory Board 
Environmental Futures Committee 


Chair 

Dr. Raymond Loehr 

H. M. Alharthy Centennial Chair and Professor 
Environmental and Water Resources Program 
The University of Texas at Austin 
Austin, TX 

Members 1 


Mr. Alvin Aim 

Sector Vice President 
Science Applications International 
Corporation 
McLean, VA 

Mr. Richard Conway 

Senior Corporate Fellow 
Union Carbide Corporation 
South Charleston, WV 
(Liaison to the Environmental 
Engineering Committee) 

Dr. Paid Deisler 

(Retired) 

Austin, TX 

Dr. Kenneth Dickson 

Director, Institute of Applied 
Science 

University of North Texas 
Denton, TX 

(Liaison to the Ecological Processes 
and Effects Committee) 


Mr. Theodore J Gordon 

(Retired) 

Vero Beach, FL 

Mr. Fred Hansen 2 

Director, Oregon Department 
of Environmental Quality 

Portland, OR 

Dr. Morton Lippmann 

Institute for Environmental 
Medicine 

New York University 

Tuxedo, NY 

(Liaison to the Indoor Air Quality 
and Total Human Exposure 
Committee) 

Dr. Genevieve M. Matanoski 

Department of Epidemiology 

School of Public Health 

The Johns Hopkins University 

Baltimore, MD 

(Executive Committee Chair and 
Liaison to the Radiation 
Advisory Committee) 


Dr. Paulette Middleton 

Science & Policy Associates, Inc. 
Boulder, CO 

(Liaison to the Clean Air 

Scientific Advisory Committee) 

Dr. Verne Ray 

Medical Research Laboratory 
Pfizer Inc. 

Groton, CT 

(Liaison to the Drinking Water 
Committee) 

Dr. Terry Yosie 

Vice President 

E. Bruce Harrison Company 

Washington, DC 


Designated 
Federal Officals 

Dr. Edward S. Bender 
Mr. A. Robert Flaak 

Staff Secretaries 

Ms. Diana L. Pozun 
Ms. Lori Anne Gross 


2 The Committee also was assisted by Ms. Linda Greer, Natural Resources Defense 
Council (Washington, DC). 

3 Mr. Hansen served on the Environmental Futures Committee from December 1993 
until September 1994, when he resigned to become the Deputy Administrator of EPA. 



Executive Summary 


1. Why Think About the 
Future? 

For the past quarter century, the basic 
approach to environmental protection in 
this country has been, for the most part, 
reactive. Institutions have been estab- 
lished, laws passed, and regulations writ- 
ten in response to problems that already 
were posing substantial ecological and 
public health risks and costs, or that al- 
ready were causing deep-seated public 
concern. 

Since its inception, the Environ- 
mental Protection Agency (EPA)-like 
the nation-has focused its environmen- 
tal attention almost exclusively on the 
present and the past. The political will 
to establish the Agency grew out of a se- 
ries of highly-publicized, well-advanced 
environmental problems, like the fire on 
the Cuyahoga River, smog in Los Ange- 
les, and the near-extinction of the bald 
eagle. During the 1970s and 1980s, the 
U.S. Congress enacted a series of laws in- 
tended to solve serious existing environ- 
mental problems, and EPA was given the 
responsibility to administer most of them. 
The Superfund program, by definition, 
was intended to clean up the environ- 
mental mistakes of the past. Even those 
EPA activities like pollution prevention 
programs and new source performance 
standards, that are intended explicitly to 
avoid future problems, are given impetus 
by problems that already exist. 


Despite the nation’s demonstrable 
success in ameliorating a number of ex- 
isting environmental problems, an almost 
exclusive reliance on after-the-fact re- 
sponse (i.e., not responding to environ- 
mental problems until they pose imme- 
diate and unambiguous risks) will not pro- 
tect the environment adequately in the 
future. It is essential for EPA-and for 
other agencies and organizations whose 
activities affect the environment-to be- 
gin to anticipate future environmental 
problems, and then take steps to avoid 
them, not just respond to them after the 
fact. Indeed, one of the most important 
lessons taught by this country’s environ- 
mental history is that the failure to think 
about the future environmental conse- 
quences of prospective social, economic, 
and technological changes (i.e., the fail- 
ure to engage in environmental foresight) 
may impose substantial-and avoid- 
able-economic and environmental costs 
on future generations. 

Thinking about the future is more 
important today than ever before, be- 
cause ever-faster change is shrinking 
the distance between the present and 
the future. Technological capabilities- 


in computers, for example-that 
seemed beyond the horizon just a few 
years ago are now out-dated. Scientific 
understanding and the flow of informa- 
tion are accelerating. Similarly, the en- 
vironmental effects of global economic 
activity are being felt more rapidly by 
both nations and individuals. 

As a result, traditional responses 
to environmental problems, i.e., the 
actions taken by government or the pri- 
vate sector to solve problems after they 
emerge, will not be effective enough, 
or take effect quickly enough, to pro- 
tect vital economic and environmen- 
tal resources. If, for example, natural 
habitats such as temperate forests dete- 
riorated quickly and extensively, it 
probably would be too late to save many 
indigenous species by the time popula- 
tion declines were noticed. In short, the 
increased pace of economic and tech- 
nological change dictates an increased 
emphasis on foresight to protect the en- 
vironment over the long term. 

Thinking about the future is valu- 
able because, by initiating thought and 
analysis well in advance of anticipated 



“When one yenerarion’s 
behavior necessitates 
environmental remediation 
in the future, a burden of 
environmental debt is 
bequeathed to its children just 
as surely as unbalanced 
government budgets bequeath 
a burden of future 
financial debt.” 


change, it can shorten the time needed 
and improve the quality of the response 
to such change, were it to occur, and 
reduce-or avoid entirely-the losses 
that result when pollution problems 
persist over time. Because such losses 
may be irreversible, response time may 
well be a critical measure of society’s 
ability to protect environmental qual- 
ity in the future. 

The bald eagle has soared back 
from the edge of extinction, but the loss 
of that species very nearly became irre- 
versible because of inattention to the 
possible side effects of some pesticides. 


Even when losses are potentially revers- 
ible, like the respiratory effects that re- 
sult from short-term human exposure to 
ground-level ozone, high costs may be 
imposed on human health or the 
economy before ozone exposures are 
reduced. 

Thinking about the future also is 
valuable because the cost of avoiding a 
problem is often far less than the cost 
of solving it later. The national experi- 
ence with hazardous waste disposal pro- 
vides a compelling example. Some pri- 
vate companies and Federal facilities 
undoubtedly saved money in the short 
term by disposing of hazardous wastes 
inadequately, but those savings were 
dwarfed by the cost of cleaning up haz- 
ardous waste sites years later. In that 
case, foresight could have saved private 
industry, insurance companies, and the 
Federal government (i.e., taxpayers) 
billions of dollars, while reducing the 
pollutant exposures-and resulting 
anxieties-in neighboring communi- 
ties. 

Besides reducing both the response 
time and the cost of protective actions, 
thinking about the future also can help 
preserve a wider variety of response op- 


tions. For example, there are several 
ways to limit the potential future effects 
of solid waste disposal on groundwater, 
e.g., improving disposal facilities, sepa- 
rating wastes before disposal, prevent- 
ing waste generation, and recycling. 
There are fewer-and more expen- 
sive-alternatives for cleaning up 
groundwater after contamination. En- 
vironmental foresight preserves flexibil- 
ity for the future. 

Thinking about the future has an- 
other value, one that goes beyond the 
immediate costs and benefits of envi- 
ronmental protection. Actions driven 
by environmental foresight can help 
strengthen intergenerational equity by 
preserving the environmental inherit- 
ance of future generations. When one 
generation’s behavior necessitates en- 
vironmental remediation in the future, 
a burden of environmental debt is be- 
queathed to its children just as surely 
as unbalanced government budgets he- 
queath a burden of future financial 
debt. By anticipating the emergence of 
environmental problems, and by taking 
steps now to prevent them, the present 
generation can minimize the environ- 
mental and financial debts that future 
generations will incur. 

Finally, thinking about the future 
is valuable because it allows people to 
shape the world in which they live. The 
future undoubtedly will be different 
from the present; change is inexorable. 



But humanity is not powerless in the 
face of change. The kinds of change that 
will occur, and their effects on the en- 
vironment, are not inevitable and im- 
mutable. The future can be 
changed-and i mp r o v ed - 1 hr o u gh 
commitment and action in the present. 

In summary, environmental fore- 
sight can help identify potential issues 
and options for action that, if taken to- 
day, would help protect the environment 
from the adverse effects of future change. 
By thinking of the future, by engaging in 
environmental foresight, the American 
people can better understand the full 
range of risks and opportunities-envi- 
ronmental and economic-possible in the 
future, and then better define the actions 
needed today to reduce the risks and pre- 
serve the opportunities. 


2. The Environmental Futures 
Committee 

In July 1993, EPA Administrator Carol 
Browner and David Gardiner, the EPA 
Assistant Administrator for the Office 
of Policy, Planning, and Evaluation 
(OPPE), asked the Science Advisory 
Board (SAB) to investigate environ- 
mental futures. They solicited the 
SAB’s advice on the value of anticipat- 
ing environmental problems that might 
emerge in the future, the tools that 
might be used to anticipate them, and 


examples of possible emerging ecologi- 
cal and human health problems. In 
other words, EPA asked the SAB to 
apply its scientific expertise, look be- 
yond the horizon, and then advise the 
Agency on the use of foresight as a tool 
for protecting the environment for fu- 
ture generations. 

In response to EPA’s request, the 
SAB formed the Environmental Futures 
Committee (EFC) to undertake a study 
of environmental foresight. (The mem- 
bers of the EFC are listed at the front of 
this report.) The EFC’s major objectives 
were to: 

• Assess different methodologies cur- 
rently being used to study possible fu- 
tures and anticipate likely future 
events; 

• Identify some environmental issues 
that could emerge over the long term 
(through the year 2025); and 

• Advise EPA on ways to incorporate 
futures research into the Agency’s ac- 
tivities. 

This report. Beyond the Horizon: 
Using Foresight to Protect the Environ- 
mental Future, summarizes the results of 
the EFC’s study. 

To support its investigation into 
environmental futures, the EFC held 
more than a dozen public meetings and 
six fact-finding sessions with various or- 


ganizations inside and outside the Fed- 
eral government. The individuals and 
organizations that provided informa- 
tion for this report are listed in Appen- 
dix I of the technical annex. 

In addition, five of the SAB’s 
standing committees prepared full re- 
ports that include conclusions and rec- 
ommendations related to possible future 
environmental issues in their areas of 
special expertise. These reports, which 
contain more detailed information than 
this summary report, are available to 
the public. Information on how to ob- 
tain them, together with a short de- 
scription of each standing committee’s 
conclusions and recommendations, can 
be found at the back of this report. 


3. A System of Inquiry 

To meet the objectives of this study, the 
EFC first outlined a formal system of in- 
quiry capable of anticipating possible 
environmental issues that could emerge 
over the next five to 30 years. Then it 
tested that system in order to define 
specific issues that could emerge. Thus, 
the EFC not only delineated the vari- 
ous methodologies currently available 
to futures research, but it tested one of 
them. Both elements-the generic 
analysis and the specific application- 
contributed to the conclusions and rec- 
ommendations in this report. 



“...looking beyond the horizon 
is essential to the nation’s 
future success in protecting 
the environment.” 


From the outset, the EFC recog- 
nized that it was not possible to antici- 
pate future environmental problems 
without attempting to identify the large 
social, economic, and technological 
forces that were likely to drive future 
changes in environmental conditions. 
Such drivers (e.g., population growth, 
economic expansion) can generate en- 
vironmental stressors (e.g., habitat al- 
teration, global climate change) that 
cause adverse effects on specific human 
health and ecological endpoints (loss of 
particular species, lung cancer in hu- 
mans). Figure 1 presents a conceptual 
model of the relationship between driv- 
ers, stressors, and endpoints. 

Because understanding the drivers 
of change is critical to understanding 
change itself, the EFC attempted to 
identify possible drivers of environmen- 
tal change in the future. Although there 
are many such drivers, the EFC identi- 
fied four as especially important: popu- 
lation growth and urbanization, eco- 


nomic expansion and resource con- 
sumption, technological development, 
and environmental attitudes and insti- 
tutions. These drivers are discussed in 


more detail in Section 4 of the techni- 
cal annex to this report. 

The EFC also reviewed method- 
ologies currently available for anticipat- 
ing environmental issues that could 
emerge in the future. A detailed sum- 
mary of these methodologies is pre- 
sented in Section 3 of the technical 
annex. 

Finally, by applying one of the 
foresight methodologies, the EFC com- 
piled an initial list of possible future en- 
vironmental issues. A more detailed dis- 
cussion of these issues is contained in 
Section 5 of the technical annex. 




4. Beyond the Horizon 

The process of assessing and applying the 
formal system of inquiry called futures re- 
search led the EFC to the major conclu- 
sions of this report: EPA, and other agen- 
cies and organizations whose activities 
affect the environment, should give as 
much attention to avoiding future envi- 
ronmental problems as to controlling 
current ones. In particular, EPA should 
establish a strong environmental futures 
capability that serves as an early-warn- 
ing system for emerging environmental 
problems. 

Because EPA is responsible for pro- 
tecting the environment now and over 
the long term, the Agency has an obliga- 
tion to search for the “weak signals” that 
portend future risk to human health and 
to ecosystems, and that provide early 
clues about how to ameliorate or avoid 
those problems entirely. EPA’s futures re- 
search should be global in scope, eclectic 
in its use of information sources, and 
quantitative whenever possible. It should 
be continuous, interactive with other or- 
ganizations, and subject to scrutiny from 
outside the Agency. It should be linked 
to the futures research of other agencies 
and organizations, and its results should 
be shared openly with the public. 

EPA’s traditional methods of iden- 
tifying-and solving-environmental 
problems will not be adequate to pro- 


tect against problems that may emerge 
several years-or decades-from now. 
They were not designed to determine 
the costs of future environmental prob- 
lems or the benefits of actions taken 
today to avoid them, both of which are 
difficult to estimate accurately. Futures 
research has to be extraordinarily tol- 
erant of omissions, uncertainties, inac- 
curacies, and errors, because any view 
beyond the horizon is inevitably dim. 

Yet looking beyond the horizon is 
essential to the nation’s future success in 
protecting the environment. Protecting 
the future with foresight is a critical part 
of EPA’s responsibility, and it is a forward- 
looking extension of the pollution pre- 
vention concept. 

EPA alone is not responsible for 
looking beyond the horizon in order to 
protect future environmental quality. 
Many other organizations, both inside 
and outside of government, have substan- 
tial roles to play. Thus, this summary re- 
port contains detailed recommendations 
intended to help EPA, other Federal 
agencies, the private sector, and the na- 
tion clarify their view of, and better pro- 
tect, the environment of the future. 


5. The Recommendations 

As society plans for the future, it is 
legitimate and appropriate for EPA to 
take responsibility for anticipating 


and attempting to mitigate future en- 
vironmental problems, particularly 
those that may be only “dots on the 
horizon” now, but whose potential 
effects in the future may be large. An 
anticipatory role is especially appro- 
priate, given the fact that some fu- 
ture environmental problems will be 
different, and possibly more far- 
reaching, than environmental prob- 
lems in the past. 

EPA cannot undertake this effort 
by itself. The involvement of many 
other agencies and organizations, as 
well as the private sector and the gen- 
eral public-all of whose activities af- 
fect environmental quality-is essen- 
tial to the success of this forward- 
looking, evaluative, and ultimately 
pollution-preventing effort. 

This report does not predict or 
even suggest that environmental ca- 
lamities are inevitable in the future. 
Rather, through the investigation of 
future possibilities, this report em- 
phasizes the value of anticipating, un- 
derstanding, and-if necessary-re- 
sponding to environmental problems 
before they emerge in the future, 
rather than continuing to play 
“catch-up” with problems after they 
emerge. The following recommenda- 
tions are intended to strengthen the 
nation’s ability to protect the future 
using the tools of foresight. 



Summary of Recommendations 


1. As muck atteniioa ekotsM be gives 
to avoiding fafcuro ©mrsmnmexstoi 
problems es to eonfeolltog cmxeacit 
osres, 

EPA should incorporate futures re- 
search and analysis into all of its 
programs and activities, particularly 
strategic planning and budgeting, 
and then be prepared to act-in 
conjunction with other public and 
private-sector organizations-on 
the basis of that information. 

A Ass an essentia! part; of Its futoros 
eapsMIUtos, EPA &hoeid establish 
ae. emiy-wmsrirag system to iden- 
tify potential As tore envimamea- 
tal risks. 

Working with other agencies and 
organizations as appropriate, EPA 
should establish a look-out panel- 
made up of individuals from inside 
and outside government-to pro- 
vide the Agency, and the nation, 
with an early warning of environ- 
mental issues that may emerge in 
the future. 


3, la s kssgesNfeaa, bkhs eorapmhssa- 
sive effort, M*A sboald evaluate 
five evemroMog problem areas se- 
toted to a ssasafeer of potential fto 
fare emviroxsroeobsti iss&es. 


As EPA strengthens its futures ca- 
pabilities, it should pay particular- 
and ongoing-attention to five ma- 
jor problem areas: 

• Sustainability of terrestrial eco- 
systems; 

• Non-cancer human health ef- 
fects; 

• Total air pollutant loadings; 

. Non-traditional environmental 
stressors; and 
. Health of the oceans. 


EPA shfrakt sttomlsste 


m&an&t efforts to anticipate and 
rospe&d to emnrotmxental change. 


Because an integrated, national ef- 
fort is essential to environmental 
protection, EPA should spur coop- 
erative activities among Federal 
agencies, different levels of govern- 
ment, and tire private sector in four 
key areas: 


. Improving and integrating envi- 
ronment-related futures studies; 

• Focusing attention on the broad 
causes of environmental change, 
not just the end results; 

• Improving environmental aware- 
ness and education; and 

. Establishing a broad-based data 
system for anticipating future en- 
vironmental risks. 

§, EPA, as well as ©toe?: sgesretoe sad 
srs'gstosettoe.s, six© to. d tassxsgsdse 
tost global emtonmnestosl qaaliiy 
is s matter of steategi© ntoiton.sd 
istorosst 

Recognizing that the United States 
is part of a global ecosystem that is 
affected by the actions of all coun- 
tries, EPA should begin working 
with relevant agencies and organi- 
zations to develop strategic national 
policies that link national security, 
foreign relatrons, environmental 
quality, and economic growth. 



1. The Forces of Change 

Large social, economic, technological, 
and institutional forces will cause fu- 
ture environmental risks that are po- 
tentially greater than those currently 
recognized and managed. 

Any attempt to anticipate future 
change must begin with the forces that 
drive such change. These forces-so- 
called “drivers’ ‘-suggest how change 
will manifest itself in the future, and 
how the environmental effects of such 
change can be altered by action in the 
present. 

Environmental foresight requires 
an understanding of the large social, 
economic, technological, and institu- 
tional forces that contain the seeds of 
future environmental problems. Al- 
though many forces-seen and unfore- 
seen-no doubt will affect future envi- 
ronmental quality, four of the most 
likely-and important-are: 1) the in- 
crease and rapid urbanization of global 
populations; 2) economic expansion 
and related energy use and natural re- 
source consumption; 3) technological 
advances; and 4) the environmental at- 
titudes and institutions that reflect and 
condition the responses of people ev- 
erywhere to environmental change. 

These drivers are interdependent, 
and the changes they drive could have 
both positive and negative effects on 


the environment. Population growth 
and higher per capita income, for ex- 
ample, most likely will drive increased 
demands for energy, natural resources, 
and manufactured goods. At the same 
time, higher per capita income, com- 
bined with improved education and an 
expanded range of personal choices, 
could reduce population pressures, 
while cleaner fuels and higher end-use 
efficiencies could reduce the local and 
global environmental effects of in- 
creased energy use. Technological 
changes could either exacerbate or ame- 
liorate environmental pressures. 

Clearly, the drivers of future 
change are not static, passive forces. 
They are the consequences of personal, 
community, and national choices. Thus 
the drivers of change are themselves 
subject to change, and, viewed sepa- 
rately, they suggest the range, signifi- 
cance, and complexity of the forces that 
will affect environmental quality in the 
future. 

Population Growth and Urbanization 

The continuing growth in human popu- 
lation, and the concentration of growing 


Findings on 
Environmental 
Futures 


populations in large urban areas, will pose 
enormous environmental challenges in 
the future. The United Nations projects 
that the global population will increase 
from 5.6 billion currently to between 7.9 
and 12 billion by the year 2050. (See Fig- 
ure 2.) Urban areas will grow even faster, 
thus increasing the number of megacities 
with populations numbering from 10 to 
20 million or more. As populations be- 
come more concentrated, environmental 
problems will intensify. Providing safe 
drinking water, wastewater and solid 
waste disposal systems, as well as envi- 
ronmentally-sustainable transportation 
systems will pose a daunting challenge in 
urban areas worldwide, including in some 
parts of the United States. Failure to pro- 
vide for those needs will contribute to 
new or exacerbated environmental prob- 
lems that could have regional or interna- 
tional social, economic, and political 
ramifications. 

Economic Expansion and Resource 
Consumption 

Over the next 20 years, per capita in- 
come in many developing countries is 
likely to increase. Currently, Latin 



America and the Asian Pacific Rim 
economies are experiencing rapid eco- 
nomic growth, and substantial growth 
also is likely in other Asian nations and 
Central and Eastern Europe. This de- 
velopment, coupled with population 
growth, will result in greater consump- 
tion of energy, natural resources, and 
consumer goods. 

Although recent U.S. and Western 
European experience indicates that en- 
ergy use does not necessarily grow in di- 
rect proportion to economic growth, 
there is little doubt that energy use will 
rise dramatically in the developing world 
over the next 20 to 30 years. According 
to Department of Energy projections, 
energy demand in developing nations is 


likely to reach 240 quadrillion BTUs 
(quads) by the year 2010, an increase of 
over 40 percent in 20 years. During the 
same period, U.S. energy demand is pro- 
jected to reach 105 quads, a 26 percent 
increase. By 2010, developing nations 
could account for more than half of the 
world’s total energy demand. This level 
of growth is likely, even if per capita en- 
ergy consumption in developing countries 
remains at much lower levels than in the 
industrialized world. 

The fuels used to provide energy 
could have a profound impact on the 
environment. If countries such as 
China and India choose to generate 
electricity with conventional coal tech- 
nologies and minimum pollution con- 


Figure 2. Population Growth, 1750-2100 


20 


o 

CL 

o 

0) 

Q. 

O 

<f) 

c 

o 


15 


10 


00 5 


0 

1750 


High 

Growth 


Medium 

Growth 


Low 

Growth 


1800 1850 1900 1950 2000 2050 2100 



Actual 


Developed Regions 


Year 


trols, the local, regional, and global 
environmental impacts could be sub- 
stantial. On the other hand, alternative 
fuels and higher energy efficiency could 
help reduce those effects. 

The potentially devastating effects 
of population growth, economic expan- 
sion, and individual behavior on natural 
resources already are evident in many 
parts of the world. All major ocean fish- 
ing areas presently are being fished at or 
beyond capacity, according to the United 
Nations, and global per capita seafood 
supplies have declined by nine percent 
within the past five years. (See Figure 3.) 
Approximately 5-10 percent of the 
world’s living reefs-the rainforests of the 
oceans-have died because of economic 
activity along coastlines and in coastal 
waters. Continuation of trends like these, 
especially in light of expected population 
growth, would have adverse environmen- 
tal and economic consequences for people 
everywhere. 

Technological Development 

Throughout history, technological 
change has been one of the most im- 
portant factors driving economic and 
environmental change. Technology is 
likely to play an even greater role in the 
future, as technological development 
proceeds at a faster pace and has a more 
pervasive impact on societies and indi- 
viduals. 


Source: United Nations 



In the past, the adverse environ- 
mental effects of growing populations 
and expanding economies have been 
ameliorated by the development of new 
technologies-centralized wastewater 
treatment systems, for example. Tech- 
nological advances in the future (e.g., 
cleaner fuels, more energy-efficient 
transportation and power distribution 
systems, less wasteful manufacturing 
processes) are likely to yield similar en- 
vironmental benefits. 

At the same time, new products 
(e.g., alternative transportation fuels) and 
materials (e.g., in photovoltaic cells or 
next-generation batteries) may result in 
new exposures and pose potential new 
risks to human health and ecosystems. In 
this sense, the future will be much like 
the past: technological change will bring 
with it both environmental improve- 
ments and environmental problems. 

One of the central challenges fac- 
ing society today is anticipating the 
likely environmental effects of future 
technological development, and in- 
cluding a concern for environmental 
quality in the design of future technolo- 
gies and products. New technologies- 
in transportation, communications, 
health care, and manufacturing-un- 
doubtedly will change the world of the 
future; many of those changes will have 
environmental benefits. But neither 
society nor industry can afford to wait 
until then to begin addressing the en- 


vironmental problems those technolo- to reduce population growth, educating 
gies may bring with them. consumers on the benefits of purchas- 

ing environmentally-preferable prod- 

Environmental Attitudes and Institutions ucts, and strengthening the ability of 

In the long run, environmental quality is non-government organizations to pro- 
not determined solely by the actions of vide technical assistance, training, and 
governments, regulated industries, or other services to support public health 
non-government organizations. It is and ecosystem protection in developed 
largely a function of the decisions and be- and developing nations, 
havior of individuals, families, businesses, 

and communities everywhere. Conse- 

quently, the extent of environmental 2. Current Uses of Foresight 

awareness and the strength of environ- 
mental institutions will be two critical Foresight-or futures research and 
factors driving changes in environmen- analysis-already is being vised by gov- 
tal quality in the future. eminent, private business, and non- 

A concerned, educated public, acting government oiganizations to anticipate 
through responsive local, national, and in- future change, 
ternational institutions, will 

serve as effective agents for 


avoiding future environmental 
problems, no matter what they 
are. Environmental institu- 
tions, strengthened by in- 
formed public support, will play 
a critical role in devising and 
implementing effective na- 
tional and international re- 
sponses to emerging issues. 

There are several 
promising ways to shape en- 
vironmental attitudes and 
institutions, and thus help 
protect the environmental 
future. These include em- 
powering women worldwide 


Figure 3. World Fish Catch Per Person, 

1950-92 


20 





5 


0 | i ; ; ; : 

1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 

Year 

Source: FAO, Yearbook of Fishery Statistics: 
Catches and Landings (Rome: various years) 




Some government agencies, pri- 
vate businesses, and non-government 
organizations already use foresight-or 
futures research and analysis, as it is 
sometimes called-in planning, goal- 
setting, and policy-shaping. Although 
different organizations use foresight for 
different purposes, in all cases the par- 
ticipation of management in the fore- 
sight process has been essential to its 
success. 

While most futures studies focus on 
the nearer term (less than five years), 
some reach considerably further into the 
future. For example, within the Federal 
government, several agencies use quan- 
titative forecasting techniques that em- 
ploy statistical models to project long- 
term future conditions. The Energy In- 
formation Administration within the De- 
partment of Energy develops detailed en- 
ergy use projections as far as 20 years into 
the future. With a shorter-term focus, the 
Internal Revenue Service, the Depart- 
ment of Defense, and the intelligence 
community employ scanning systems and 
trend analysis as part of institutional plan- 
ning. The Department of Defense uses 
“gaming” exercises to anticipate the pos- 
sible circumstances of future warfare and 
prepare a range of options in response. 

Over the past several years, many 
regional, state, and local governments 
have applied the tools of foresight to as- 
sess issues associated with demographics, 
economic development, global climate 


change, education, criminal justice, and 
agriculture. To date, 30 states have estab- 
lished State Futures Commissions to help 
set long-term goals, strategies, and action 
agendas for the states. 

A number of foresight activities 
have been supported by the governments 
of other countries and by international 
organizations (e.g., the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Develop- 
ment, the World Bank). The Dutch gov- 
ernment, in particular, has been a lead- 
ing advocate for national-level foresight 
and long-range planning. Five Dutch 
ministries currently are sponsoring a re- 
search program to identify new technolo- 
gies or technical systems that will support 
economic growth and environmental 
quality 50 years in the future. 

In the private sector, foresight gen- 
erally is used in relatively short-term busi- 
ness planning in several ways: to antici- 
pate changing circumstances that can af- 
fect markets or competitive forces; to 
forecast the size of current and potential 
markets under varying assumptions about 
price and competition; to select a set of 
corporate financial and other goals; and 
to elicit and test corporate strategy and 
potential actions. The techniques used in 
the private sector include demographic 
and geographic analyses, statistical con- 
sumer polling, formalized environmental 
scanning, scenario construction, expert 
panels, and econometrics and other forms 
of computer modeling. 


Examples of corporations that use 
such techniques can be found in essen- 
tially all industries, including communi- 
cations, electronics, transportation, fi- 
nance, energy, publishing, insurance, ag- 
riculture, manufacturing, pharmaceuti- 
cals, health care, and biotechnology. 
Underlying these corporate activities is 
the central assumption that opportuni- 
ties can be discovered and problems 
avoided by thinking about what lies 
ahead. 

EPA has relatively little institu- 
tional experience with futures research. 
A small Futures Office has been estab- 
lished to identify and test environmen- 
tal foresight tools, and futures research is 
beginning to shape policy decisions in 
some program offices. For example, EPA 
has been working with other government 
agencies to anticipate and respond to the 
possibility of global climate change, since 
measurements of carbon dioxide buildup 
in the atmosphere have provided an early 
warning of possible global warming. In 
order to avoid potential environmental 
problems in the future, the Agency has 
begun working with other Federal and 
state agencies to encourage energy con- 
servation and thus reduce or limit carbon 
dioxide emissions. (See Figure 4.) 



3. Foresight Methodologies 

Futures research and analysis can be 
systematically organized as an early- 
warning system to identify- and then 
help prevent- future environmental 
problems. 

In general, there are three basic 
techniques widely used to identify pos- 
sible future conditions. One is a top- 
down approach; it involves the use of 
“scenarios” that postulate certain cir- 
cumstances about the future and then 
draw some likely implications from 
those circumstances. The second is a 
bottom-up approach; it draws future im- 
plications from early warning signals, 
which are based either on the extrapo- 
lation of current data and trends, or on 
the observations of knowledgeable in- 
dividuals-so-called “look-out panels.” 
The third is scanning, which involves a 
continual, planned, deliberate, and 
thorough review of selected published 
information, and contacts with other 
“futures watching” organizations. 

All three approaches individu- 
ally-and particularly in combina- 
tion-can provide valuable insights 
into the possible emergence of environ- 
mental problems in the future. (Figure 
5 shows the major features of an envi- 
ronmental foresight process.) 

In the first case, the top-down ap- 
proach, scenarios are constructed to 


study the environmental implications 
of assumed future developments in 
“drivers” like energy use, population 
growth and density, technological ad- 
vances, waste generation, and demand 
for natural resources like potable wa- 
ter. These images of possible futures can 
be studied systematically to estimate 
when and where environmental prob- 
lems could emerge, and to assess differ- 
ent types of policies that could be used 
to obviate them. 

Within a given scenario, assump- 
tions concerning the future can be var- 
ied to reflect different rates of change 
(e.g., in energy use, population growth). 
Postulated conditions about the future 


also can be changed to reflect a future that 
is possible (exploratory scenarios), or a 
future that is desirable (normative sce- 
narios). As long as these scenarios dis- 
play changes in important variables over 
time within a consistent analytical frame- 
work, they can be useful tools for antici- 
pating environmental problems in the 
future, and analyzing the range of possible 
responses to them. 

In the second case, the bottom-up 
approach, a specialized “look-out panel” 
can provide perceptions, observations, 
and information about important envi- 
ronmental changes on— or just beyond- 
the horizon. Look-out panels, which can 
include laboratory scientists, professional 


Figure 4. Carbon Emissions from Fossil Fuels, 1950-2010 


c/5 

c 

o 


C/5 

c 

o 


CQ 



Year 


Source: Oak Ridge National Laboratory; Worldwatch 



field data collectors, or neighborhood vol- 
unteers, function continuously. Through 
systematic questioning and feedback, 
panelists can provide observations about 
the environment that can serve as early 
warnings of environmental changes, and 
they can assess the implications of these 
changes to human health and ecosystem 
viability. 

In the third case, information re- 
lated to emerging environmental prob- 
lems can be gleaned from scholarly jour- 
nals, newspapers, newsletters, business 
plans, and science-oriented computer bul- 
letin boards. Such sources of information, 
which can be found in the United States 
and abroad, include literature and aca- 


demic disciplines well beyond the bounds 
of traditional environmental science. 
Scanning also can be part of the foresight 
activities of look-out panels. 

All three approaches are indepen- 
dently useful in identifying the first weak 
signals-the dots on the horizon-that 
warn of emerging environmental prob- 
lems. In addition, the techniques rein- 
force one another by providing early 
warnings from different perspectives. 
Scenario analyses tend to raise top-down 
issues generated by the assumptions used 
in the scenarios (e.g., C02 buildup as a 
result of the energy strategies of large 
countries like China and India). The 
look-out panels call attention to specific 


Figure 5. An Environmental Foresight Process 



emerging issues (e.g., the introduction of 
new toxic chemicals). Scanning cuts 
across both approaches. 

All three techniques can help iden- 
tify potential environmental issues that 
could be subjected to in-depth risk analy- 
sis. All three, if used continuously and 
interactively, could serve as a first line of 
defense in protecting future environmen- 
tal quality. 


4. The Value-and 
Uncertainty-of Foresight 

The value of futures research and analy- 
sis lies not in making predictions, but in 
analyzing and organizing information that 
can help shape decisions and actions. 

Futures research and analysis will 
not result in a complete or accurate pic- 
ture of the future. The future, after all, is 
dependent upon personal and institu- 
tional decisions, chance, and natural pro- 
cesses, all of which interact in an uncer- 
tain and sometimes chaotic fashion, the 
results of which are impossible to predict 
with accuracy. 

Because of its analytical processes 
and organizing principles, however, fu- 
tures research can enlighten contempo- 
rary understanding of future possibilities 
and options. Foresight need not be en- 
tirely accurate or complete to be of value 
to decisionmakers or to society as a whole. 

The intellectual rigor necessitated by fu- 
tures research is valuable in and of itself. 





The methodological processes of foresight 
force new ways of thinking and new ways 
of looking at old realities. They demand 
comprehensiveness, a receptivity to un- 
usual ideas, and the ability to reconfigure 
old data from new perspectives. They help 
set an agenda for discussion and debate 
within organizations, and they provide a 
more cohesive basis for planning that can 
extend across organizations. Because they 
stretch the bounds of thought, they help 
decisionmakers discern new paths to or- 
ganizational goals that may themselves be 
changing. In short, the processes of fu- 
tures research can help people explore, 
understand, prepare for, and shape the 
future while it is still beyond the hori- 
zon, despite the uncertainties inherent in 
such a distant view. 


mittees of the SAB and individual 
members were asked to use their spe- 
cific knowledge and expertise to iden- 
tify potential issues that, given exist- 
ing “drivers” and data trends, could 
emerge within the next 5-30 years. 
The EFC then compiled and consoli- 
dated the information into a list of 
50 specific possible issues. (This list 
is presented on pages 14 and 15.) 

After compiling the list, the EFC 
applied six criteria that it considers use- 
ful in selecting issues that should be 
analyzed further. (A short description 
of these six criteria is included in the 
box below.) Based on the results of its 
selection process and the inherent simi- 
larities among some potential issues, the 
EFC consolidated them under five 


large, overarching problem areas: 
sustainability of terrestrial ecosystems; 
non-cancer human health effects; total 
air pollutant loadings; non-traditional 
environmental stressors; and health of 
the oceans. 

All of these broad problem areas 
are affected by the major drivers of 
change discussed earlier in this report. 
Because they encompass a number of 
specific environmental issues, they 
merit more detailed study. 

Sustainability of Terrestrial Ecosystems 

In the future, the health of biosystems 
and the sustainable use of natural re- 
sources will be stressed by a growing 
human population, expanding energy 
use, natural resource consumption, and 


5. Possible Emerging Problem 
Areas 

Six fifefor ts-sue-Sr 

deetion 

Colons 





?7rn Ino * H ow 

soon is 

his probie 

m ii 

-rely to em 

erge, how important is 

Because of large-scale social, eco- 

early 

reoocfei 

son, and 

now 

rapidly c? 

m the problem be re- 

nomic, technological, and institutional 

verse 

V Q f 




changes already underway, future en- 


hat exfe 

st is this a 


v problem 

that has not been ad- 

vironmental issues may emerge in at 

eve 

fed adequately? 




least five different problem areas. 

Scope: How 

extensh 


JS c 

f geograp 

hy or population a?- 

In preparing this report, the EFC 

feefe 

% for e> 

<ample-is 

this 

problem? 


applied one of the issue-identifica- 

Severity: How 

ntensive 

are the 

like 

v health 

acol og Seal , see n om ic , 

tion methodologies (i.e., the bottom- 

and < 


saets or th 

is p 

roblem, an 

d are they reversible? 

up, look-out panel approach) to test 
the methodology and, in the process, 

visibility : How 


iblic cone 

3rn 

s this prof 

! V : > 1 5 ! S\v ! Y iV : v WO v f 

compile a list of possible future envi- 

Probability: What 

the h 

keii flood c 

rf th 

s problem 

5 jvt nd .. 

v.** : 

ronmental issues. The standing com- 

sitati 

iGi res 

oonse, in 

:.GO 

suture r 





Potential Future Environmental Issues 
Identified by the EFC Look-Out Panel 


The following summary statements of the 50 potential fu- 
ture environmental issues describe each issue as if it were, 
in fact, to emerge. However, the EFC is not predicting that 
these issues actually will emerge, nor does the EFC be- 
lieve this list is comprehensive. A different group of people 
might well produce a somewhat different list. This list is 
simply one set of possibilities requiring further investigation, 
analysis, and-if necessary-action. 


This list is not meant to connote an order of priority or 
relative importance. Several issues that will be important 
in the future-such as cleaning up toxic waste sites-are 
not listed because they already are well-recognized. More 
detailed information on each potential issue can be found 
in Section 5 of the technical annex to this report, available 
from the SAB. 


Human Health Effects and Human Health Risk 
Assessment 

• Health problems and social disorder result from 
environmental stress. 

• The information highway is found to produce psychological 
and societal impacts. 

• New understanding of secondary air pollutants and their 
risks requires new risk control strategies. 

• The total toxic air burden, including synergistic effects 
among pollutants, requires new, simultaneous risk 
management strategies. 

• Emphasis is placed on multiple end-points and multiple 
exposures requiring new risk management criteria. 

• The application of major advances in basic biomedical 
sciences leads to radically new methods of human health 
risk assessment and management. 

• Methods to assess and manage exposures and risks from 
infectious agents are found to be inadequate. 

• Technology to control newly recognized pathogens in 
drinking water is found to be inadequate. 


Combined Human Health and Ecological Effects and 
Their Assessment and Management 

. Animal and human health (e.g., reproductive capacity) 
and ecosystems are affected adversely by global 
dispersion of estrogen-mimicking chemicals. 

. Long-range transport and global accumulations of 
pollutants are found to be sources of adverse health and 
ecological effects. 

. The need to develop and use early warning signs of 
potential environmental problems is recognized. 

. The introduction of exotic species into ecosystems 
requires the development of new methods of risk 
assessment and management. 

. The need to establish and maintain an encompassing 
environmental data resource for risk management 
purposes is recognized. 

. The need to assess unregulated, unevaluated agents 
(existing and newly introduced) and their unforeseen 
environmental impacts is recognized. 



Climatological Effects and Their Assessment And 
Management 

. The need to understand the mechanisms and effects of 
local climate change is recognized. 

. The need to understand the dynamics of the 
counteracting effects of atmospheric particles and 
greenhouse gases on global climate change becomes 
critical. 


Radiation: Health and Environmental Assessment 
And Management 

. Major health hazards of non-ionizing radiation are 
demonstrated. 

. Increasing ground-level ultraviolet radiation results in 
massive adverse effects on plant and animal life. 

. Releases of radioactive materials through accident, war, or 
terrorism lead to the search for better control mechanisms. 








Intergovernmental - Governmental - Institutional 

Local, regional, and global transport and accumulation of 
pollutants from developing countries becomes a major 
international environmental problem. 

Inefficient use of energy in transportation and other 
sectors has growing adverse impact on global 
environmental quality. 

Increased use of lead and other metals in “clean” 
vehicles leads to increased potential for adverse impacts 
on environmental quality. 

Urban infrastructure decay leads to additional and 
unexpected sources of adverse environmental incidents. 

The environment and U.S. industrial competitiveness are 
at risk from non-optimal environmental strategies and 
their costs. 

Industrial uses of wastes cause new problems. 

Scientific/technical core competencies in EPA prove to 
be inadequate as future challenges arise. 

Environmental problems result from rapid growth in 
developing countries. 

Local climate changes and environmental impacts result 
from the use of alternative energy sources. 

Environmental emergencies caused by accidents, 
terrorism, or crime require enhanced capabilities for 
international response. 

Environmental degradation in developing countries is 
exacerbated by poorly controlled exports from developed 
countries. 

Socioeconomic Factors 

. Voluntary initiatives fail to produce changes in behavior 
needed to sustain and improve environmental quality. 

. Environmental inequity leads to environmental apathy and 
violence. 


Land Use Issues 

Increasing environmental pressures require improved 
land-use practices. 

. Increasing agricultural intensity in developing countries 
increases soil depletion, atmospheric particulates, and 
desertification. 

. Inadequate capabilities exist to cope with the 
environmental consequences of natural disasters. 


Ecological Effects, Their Assessment and 
Management 

. The development of regional strategies for environmental 
assessment and protection is necessary. 

. Increasing light pollution is found to be seriously 
disruptive to many species’ physiology and behavior. 

. Increasing noise pollution is found to disrupt many 
species’ essential behavior patterns. 

. Cumulative environmental stresses lead to increasing 
decline and die-off of sentinel species. 

The use of alternate energy sources leads to adverse 
impacts on environmental quality. 

• Global climate changes and stratospheric ozone 

depletion lead to adverse impacts on ecological systems. 

• Losses of monoculture crops occur because of 
unexpected pathogens. 


Resource Use and Depletion 

. Biodiversity is lost as a result of habitat alteration and 
destruction. 

. The “health” of the oceans deteriorates further. 

Fossil fuel depletion leads to the use of other 
contaminating, habitat-destructive alternatives. 

Adverse ecological effects result from over-exploitation 
of natural terrestrial resources. 

The quality and quantity of surface and groundwater 
diminish as a result of inefficient use and contamination. 


Other Risk Management Issues 

The continuing lack of societal consensus on criteria for 
“acceptable” risk leads to policy gridlock. 

. Preventing dispersion of chemicals from diverse sources 
becomes more critical than point source management. 

. The discovery that adverse effects occur at ever-lower 
exposures leads to the need to develop new means of 
managing the net risks of multiple pollutant exposures. 










land development. As the stresses on 
biosystems intensify, the preservation of 
biodiversity will become increasingly 
important for both economic and en- 
vironmental reasons. As populations 
grow and urban areas expand, height- 
ened competition for the use of land 
will put new strains on natural habitats. 


“Management of human 
health risks in the future 
will have to 
consider the full ranee 
of health effects under 
conditions of both 
single and multiple 
exposures.” 


In the years ahead, failure to maintain 
healthy terrestrial ecosystems could 
lead to natural resource damage, irre- 
versible losses of species, and fragmen- 
tation of habitats, thus endangering 
both economic and environmental 
sustainability and seriously threatening 
human and ecological wellbeing. 

Non-Cancer Human Health Effects 

The human health effects that can re- 
sult from environmental pollution in- 
clude many endpoints in addition to 


cancer. The loss of fertility and birth 
defects, for example, have been linked 
to certain organic chemicals. Develop- 
mental problems in children, neurologi- 
cal deficits, faster aging of the lung, and 
increased rates of mortality and morbid- 
ity have been associated with lead, mer- 
cury, ozone, and ambient particulate 
matter, respectively. Management of 
human health risks in the future will 
have to consider the full range of health 
effects under conditions of both single 
and multiple exposures. 

A good example of the kind of hu- 
man health problem that already is 
sending early warning signals is the pos- 
sible “feminization” of animals and hu- 
mans. An increased occurrence of ad- 
verse health effects (e.g., immature 
male sex organs) in wildlife may be as- 
sociated with exposures to estrogen- 
mimicking compounds in the environ- 
ment. Since humans are exposed to the 
same chemical compounds, they may be 
subject to similar risks. For example, 
lower sperm counts currently being de- 
tected in human males could be linked 
to exposures to estrogen-mimicking 
compounds. 

Total Air Pollutant Loadings 

In the future, total loadings of pollut- 
ants in and from the atmosphere may 
pose environmental problems not seen 
before, or intensify familiar problems 
beyond the point where conventional 


controls will solve them. For example, 
aggregate increases in the use of fossil 
fuels, combined with long-range trans- 
port and local conditions, could lead to 
regional or global air quality problems 
(e.g., acid rain and global warming). 
Deposition of air-borne contaminants 
could exacerbate problems on land or 
in the water, problems that demand new 
kinds of responses. Because many air- 
borne chemicals are more harmful to 
human health and ecological systems 
when acting in the presence of other 
chemicals, the deposition and accumu- 
lation of multiple chemicals over time 
may lead to human health and ecologi- 
cal damage (e.g., problems related to 
the leaching of heavy metals from soil). 

Non-traditional Environmental Stressors 

In the future, previously unrecognized 
environmental stressors, and recognized 
stressors that are not adequately moni- 
tored or regulated, may be found to pose 
serious risks to human health or eco- 
systems. Many unregulated chemicals 
present in complex mixtures have been 
linked to such problems as sick build- 
ing syndrome, multiple chemical sen- 
sitivity, and excess morbidity and mor- 
tality rates related to air-borne fine par- 
ticles. Control-resistant microbes, 
plants, and insects; new kinds of water- 
borne pathogens; the accidental or mis- 
guided introduction of an exotic spe- 
cies into susceptible ecosystems: any of 



these factors could lead to human 
health or ecological problems in the fu- 
ture. Moreover, relatively well-under- 
stood stressors could begin to cause new 
kinds of problems through the slow 
building of cumulative effects, or the 
subtle effects of well-understood stres- 
sors (e.g., developmental defects in 
children exposed to low levels of lead) 
could cause new public concerns. 

Health of the Oceans 

The oceans, their complex biosystems, 
and their related food webs are likely 
to come under increasing stress from the 
worldwide activities of a growing glo- 
bal population. The adverse effects of 
overfishing, air and water-borne pollut- 
ants, and coastal development on the 
health and abundance of marine life, in- 
cluding the ecologically critical coral 
reefs, already are causing concerns in 
coastal areas. The migration of coastal 
stressors far from shore threatens the 
future health of the deep, open ocean 
as well. Pollutants like PCBs, pesticides, 
and lead have been found not only in 
the tissues of fish and marine mammals, 
but also in bottom sediments and in the 
seawater itself. Solid waste can be found 
sparsely distributed throughout the 
open ocean. Moreover, future exploita- 
tion of minerals and oceanic plant life 
could degrade the ocean environment 
even further, as similar activities on 
land have done. 


6. The Environment: 

A Strategic National 
Interest 

National and international environ- 
mental issues are rapidly becoming a 
matter of strategic national interest 

The United States is part of a 
single global ecosystem. Political, 
economic, and environmental trends 
and events in other countries affect 
the United States; pollution gener- 
ated in this country affects the rest 
of the world as well. Because of in- 
ternational environmental and eco- 
nomic linkages, environmental issues 
rapidly are becoming an issue of stra- 
tegic national interest. 

Within the past few years, the 
American people have seen firsthand 
the links between the environment and 
national security. Nations have gone to 
war to protect their access to vital natu- 
ral resources. Others have used environ- 
mental destruction in combat as a ma- 
jor instrument of war. Terrorism, envi- 
ronmental accidents like Chernobyl, 
and nuclear proliferation all have ma- 
jor implications for public and ecosys- 
tem health in this country and around 
the world. 

Possible natural resource short- 
ages, competition for scarce resources 
like potable water, and the transborder 
movement of refugees driven by dete- 
riorating environmental conditions 


could lead to destabilized governments, 
international disagreements, and re- 
gional warfare. Overfishing, acid rain, 
and raw wastewater discharges along 
and across national borders also are ex- 
amples of how environmental and natu- 
ral resource issues can lead to conten- 
tious relations among countries, and ne- 
cessitate international negotiations and 
agreements related to environmental 
quality. 

Moreover, the future quality of the 
global environment will be a factor in 
determining how economic activities 
are conducted in all countries, includ- 
ing the United States. Based on present 
trends, the future growth of the econo- 
mies in regions such as Asia and Latin 
America, for example, with an atten- 
dant increase in energy use, could con- 
tribute to global atmospheric pollution 
that today is caused primarily by 
economically developed nations. The 
loss of biodiversity through the clear- 
ing of rain forests in South America and 
Indonesia would be felt by everyone on 
earth. The stripfishing of marine life in 
the open ocean is diminishing the 
foodstocks available to global popula- 
tions over the long term. 

As can be seen from these ex- 
amples, many future environmental is- 
sues, and their relationship to economic 
development, are likely to be matters 
of strategic national interest, both to 
the United States and to other coun- 



tries, at the dawn of a new century. En- 
vironmental and natural resource-re- 
lated issues almost certainly will be 
linked to U.S. national security con- 
cerns and to a range of bilateral and 
multilateral relationships. 


“EPA must look 
beyond the horizon. 
And the Agency must 
he prepared to think 
in new ways, and act 
in new ways, based on 
what it sees.” 


7. Thinking of Futures at EPA 

To limit or avoid future environmen- 
tal problems, there is a need for EPA 
to expand its current capabilities and 
look beyond near-term problems to 
long-term environmental protection. 

As the Federal agency primarily 
responsible for protecting the envi- 
ronment, EPA has been charged with 
implementing environmental laws 
that have been, in large part, reac- 
tive. Just as those laws were enacted 
in response to existing problems, EPA 


spends most of its time and budget 
cleaning up, or remediating, pollu- 
tion problems that already are rela- 
tively serious, or that already are 
causing public concern because of 
real or perceived environmental im- 
pacts. This approach has achieved 
considerable success in the past. 

However, EPA will not be able 
to limit or prevent future environ- 
mental problems with the same regu- 
latory tools and reactive approaches 
that it has used-and used effec- 
tively-in the past. As EPA prepares 
for a future that will be as challeng- 
ing as it is uncertain, the Agency 
must develop new analytical tools, 
new approaches to decisionmaking, 
and new partnerships with stakehold- 
ers. It must develop a capacity to an- 
ticipate problems and respond to 
them long before their adverse effects 
are widely felt. The Agency must 
broaden its understanding of what 
causes environmental problems, and 
it must broaden its approach-both 
internal and external-to solving 
them. 

EPA cannot undertake this effort 
alone. For the past several years, the 
Agency has been increasing its coop- 
erative efforts with other Federal 
agencies, state governments, non- 
government organizations, interna- 
tional groups, and the private sector 
in order to solve existing environ- 


mental problems. That cooperative 
role will be even more important as 
the Agency responds to environmen- 
tal problems anticipated in the future. 

EPA is positioned to play an in- 
fluential role in focusing resources- 
both from within and outside the 
Agency-on environmental problems 
that may emerge in the future. EPA 
could help coordinate and assess the 
environmental implications of the fu- 
tures research already underway in 
other parts of government. The 
Agency could work more closely with 
the U.S. business community to an- 
ticipate the future environmental im- 
plications of technological innova- 
tion. EPA could work more closely 
with the U.S. Department of State, 
international organizations, and the 
agencies of other nations to identify 
the drivers of emerging regional or 
global problems, and then help define 
possible responses to them. 

The environmental problems of 
the future undoubtedly will be facets 
of large-scale economic, demo- 
graphic, and technological change. 
Other organizations-go vernment 
and non-government, within and 
outside this country-will have ma- 
jor responsibilities responding to that 
change. Thus, EPA’s involvement in 
partnerships with other organizations 
will be even more important in the 
future. 



A forward-looking EPA also will 
need to change its organizational phi- 
losophy and develop new analytical 
tools. EPA will be unable to respond 
quickly and effectively to what are 
likely to be complex, synergistic 
problems if it continues to use a one- 
at-a-time, single-stressor, single-spe- 
cies, single-medium, single-end-point 
approach. 

In the face of expected change, 
EPA has to look beyond urban 
airsheds to a future where large, 
multi-state, or international regions 
are affected by total loadings of at- 


mospheric pollutants that have been 
transported thousands of miles. EPA 
has to look beyond its pollutant-by- 
pollutant control of a relative hand- 
ful of well-recognized stressors to a 
future where new chemicals, materi- 
als, bioengineered species, and other 
new agents-either singly or in com- 
bination-may cause unanticipated 
human health and ecological effects. 
EPA has to look beyond pesticide 
pollution to a future where habitat 
loss may be the critical ecological 
threat. EPA has to look beyond the 
cancer end-point to a future where 


several health endpoints may be af- 
fected synergistically by multiple 
stressors, some well-understood, but 
more unknown. EPA has to look be- 
yond the protection of estuaries, 
coastal waters, and marine fish stocks 
to a future where the oceans them- 
selves may be threatened by a vari- 
ety of economic activities in coun- 
tries thousands of miles apart and in 
the oceans themselves. 

In short, EPA must look beyond 
the horizon. And the Agency must be 
prepared to think in new ways, and act 
in new ways, based on what it sees. 



Recommendation 1 

As much attention should be given to 
avoiding futum environmental 
problems as to controlling current 
ones. 

Solving the environmental problems of 
the future is not a responsibility that 
should be left entirely to future genera- 
tions, or only to EPA. The forces of 
change that will cause those problems 
are at work now, and people today have 
a responsibility to shape those forces in 
ways that will reduce risks, and costs, 
in the future. Because actions taken 
today by government and non-govem- 
ment organizations, the private sector, 
and communities will influence envi- 
ronmental quality-for better or 
worse-in the future, people today have 
a responsibility to consider the future 
consequences of their choices and 
lifestyles. 

Accepting responsibility for the 
future is not simply a matter of 
intergenerational equity. It is an idea 
that builds on the distinctly American 
belief that each generation should leave 
its children and grandchildren with a 
better life. 

EPA, and the nation, must begin 
to think more systematically about en- 
vironmental problems that could 
emerge in the future. EPA in particular 
must begin to focus public attention on 


Recommendations On 
Environmental Futures 


environmental problems while they are 
still beyond the horizon, and then 
stimulate action-if needed-to solve 
them. 

This orientation to the future re- 
quires a broader vision at EPA. It calls 
for an Agency that goes beyond envi- 
ronmental regulation to environmen- 
tal protection in its broadest sense, an 
Agency committed to anticipating pos- 
sible future environmental problems as 
well as controlling present and past 
ones. 

To fulfill its basic responsibility to 
protect the environment, now and in 
the future, EPA needs to incorporate a 
new emphasis on environmental fore- 
sight into all its activities, including 
long-range planning, budgeting, re- 
search and development, and program 
management. In the past, these activi- 
ties have been driven by near-term exi- 
gencies like legislative deadlines and 
the most recent environmental crisis. 
EPA always will be subject to such pres- 
sures, but it must be better prepared for 
the long term as well. 

EPA should not consider this an 


exercise apart from or in addition to its 
existing responsibilities. If EPA’ s futures 
capabilities are to be effective, they 
must be integrated into EPA’s ongoing 
programs as a unique but fully interre- 
lated part. EPA should provide the re- 
sources necessary to establish environ- 
mental foresight as a critical EPA func- 
tion to be carried out-continuously 
and systematically-over the long term. 

To help communicate the results of 
its futures research to the public, EPA 
should consider issuing-once every two 
years at most-a report that describes po- 
tential environmental conditions 20 years 
into the future under several sets of as- 
sumptions. Although the prospective 
conditions described would be uncertain, 
the ensuing public discussion and debate 
would be an invaluable stimulus to pub- 
lic thinking about the future. The report 
and public debate also would stimulate 
research and data collection efforts to re- 
solve uncertainties, and that research in 
turn would clarify the vision of the fu- 
ture described in subsequent reports. A 
periodic report on environmental futures 
thus would help focus public thinking 



beyond the horizon, and provide a basis 
for public support of action-if neces- 
sary-in the present. 

The development of futures capa- 
bilities at EPA carries with it an ongoing 
obligation. Besides providing a suitable 
budget for the processes of environmen- 
tal foresight, the Agency must be pre- 
pared to evaluate findings, interact with 
other agencies and organizations, and 
possibly act on the early warnings that 
those processes might detect. Some of 
those early warnings undoubtedly will 
prove incorrect; nevertheless, if expecta- 
tions are raised without appropriate bud- 
get and follow-through, opportunities will 
be missed, and results will be disappoint- 
ing. On the other hand, if the Agency 
can infuse its policymaking with fresh in- 
sights, a sense of dynamism, and a more 
explicit understanding of future possibili- 
ties, the Agency and the nation will reap 
substantial environmental and economic 
benefits over the long run. 


Recommendation 2 

As an essential part of its futures 
capabilities, EPA should establish an 
early-warnig system to identify 
potential future environmental risks. 

One essential part of EPA’s futures capa- 
bility should be an early-warning system 
that alerts the Agency and the nation to 


specific environmental issues that may 
emerge in the future. To help provide this 
early warning, EPA should establish a 
look-out panel made up of individuals 
from inside and outside the Federal gov- 
ernment. Besides identifying issues, the 
look-out panel should screen, evaluate, 
and prioritize them. (One possible way 
for EPA to establish and use a look-out 
panel is described in the box on page 23.) 

During the course of this project, 
the EFC itself acted as a look-out panel; 
i.e., it applied the experience and ex- 
pertise of the SAB to identify 50 pos- 
sible environmental issues that could 
emerge over the next 30 years. EPA 
should use this list as the starting point 
for a rigorous, ongoing effort to iden- 
tify likely emerging issues, assess and 
prioritize them, and begin to define 
appropriate responses. 

In particular, EPA should review the 
issues identified by the EFC, and subject 
one or two to a rigorous analysis that in- 
volves other agencies or organizations 
with relevant expertise. Trend data 
should be identified and analyzed, and 
possible response options assessed. EPA’s 
periodic futures report should include this 
information. 

This kind of pilot project would 
serve several purposes. It would help fo- 
cus the Agency’s initial futures research. 
It would initiate contacts with other gov- 
ernment agencies and non-government 
organizations involved in futures re- 
search. It would begin to establish a pro- 


cess for prioritizing potential future issues 
for possible near-term response. Finally, 
it would help EPA gain experience in as- 
sessing the effectiveness of different re- 
sponse options. 

The choice of initial issues to study 
is not as important as beginning the pro- 
cess itself. EPA needs to develop a much 
greater capacity to anticipate environ- 
mental futures and identify specific issues 
that could emerge. It must develop the 
capability to screen those issues, solicit 
an external review of findings, and then 
analyze the range of response options 
available. 

The EFC has taken the first step in 
environmental foresight through the 
look-out panel that contributed to this 
report. EPA should build on this effort by 
establishing an early-warning system that 
would identify, rank, and begin the pro- 
cess of responding to environmental is- 
sues that are still beyond the horizon. 


Recommendation 3 

In a longer-term, more 
comprehensive effort, EPA should 
evaluate five overarching 
environmental problem areas related 
to a number of potential future 
environmental issues. 

Over the next 5 to 30 years, future envi- 
ronmental quality could be affected by 
social, economic, and technological 



Prototype EPA Look-Out Panel 

. EPA sets up a prototype “look-out panel” with experts in public 
health, ecology, socioeconomics, and technology. 

. Although managed by EPA, the panel also involves a variety of 
experts who can observe changes that may lead to problems 
beyond the horizon. 

. Panelists are requested periodically to scan their fields and 
provide observations about new or intensifying trends and their 
possible consequences. 

• These observations are collected and fed back to other 
panelists for comment. 

. Candidate environmental issues are screened against 
established criteria. 

. Selected issues are analyzed in the context of scenarios and 
goals developed by the Agency. 


changes already underway in the United 
States and around the world. Because of 
several factors (e.g., likely severity, vis- 
ibility to the public, and probability of 
occurring), some of these problems merit 
more thorough analysis by EPA and other 
appropriate agencies. As EPA undertakes 
to strengthen its futures capabilities, it 
should pay particular attention to five 
major problem areas that encompass a 
number of related environmental issues 
that could emerge in the future. 

Sustainability of Terrestrial Ecosystems 

Despite a growing awareness of the vi- 
tal links between viable ecosystems and 
economic prosperity, scientific tools 
useful for assessing the ecological risks 
that result from the stressors on ecologi- 
cal resources are not well developed. 
The risks themselves are poorly under- 
stood. 

Through its framework for ecologi- 
cal risk assessment, EPA has developed 
a valuable conceptual approach. How- 
ever, ecological risk assessment guide- 
lines-analogous to EPA’s human 
health risk assessment guidelines-do 
not yet exist. 

The Agency should place a high 
priority on identifying ecological end- 
points-those aspects of biosystems 
that readily manifest adverse change- 
and developing guidelines for their use 
in ecological risk assessments. The end- 
points should be selected for their reli- 
ability in assessing the effects of vari- 


ous stressors on ecosystem 
sustainability, and for their usefulness 
in monitoring ecosystem status and 
trends. Special attention should be 
given to the further development of 
ecological risk assessment guidelines 
that can address problems associated 
with loss and fragmentation of terres- 
trial habitats, freshwater and near 
coastal zone eutrophication, and the in- 
troduction of exotic species. 

Non-Cancer Human Health Effects 

Although EPA in the past has been 
concerned almost exclusively with a 
narrow range of health endpoints (i.e., 
the various forms of cancer), the 
Agency should place equal emphasis on 


non-cancer human health risks. An in- 
creasing body of data shows that, in 
many cases, a range of significant bio- 
logical responses can be affected ad- 
versely by environmental factors. As 
part of its effort to anticipate future en- 
vironmental problems, EPA should 
broaden its human health research and 
regulatory focus to include respiratory, 
cardiovascular, immunologic, neuro- 
logic, and reproductive endpoints. 

For many endpoints, the biologic 
changes cannot be measured simply by 
effects on DNA. Such changes are com- 
plex, involving the interaction of many 
organ systems (e.g., the neural, hor- 
monal, and immunologic systems). 




Thus new dose-response models should 
be considered. In fact, the total dose or 
dose rate may not be the most impor- 
tant variable affecting some human 
health endpoints. Instead, a specific 
dose at a specific time in organ devel- 
opment may be a critical variable. 

Different people are affected in 
different ways by exposures to the same 
environmental pollutants. As science 
expands its understanding of the differ- 
ences in human susceptibility, EPA 
should continue broadening its ap- 
proach to human health risk assessment 
by explicitly considering risks to suscep- 
tible populations. 

Total Air Pollutant loadings 

EPA historically has protected air qual- 
ity by focusing on one pollutant or one 
impact at a time. This pollutant-by-pol- 
lutant approach does not effectively 
address complex interactions among at- 
mospheric processes, the synergism of 
pollutants and their impacts, or the 
deposition of air-borne pollutants on 
water or land. The long-term, long-dis- 
tance, and often international charac- 
teristics of air pollution are not ad- 
equately considered. 

To improve current approaches, 
EPA needs to develop a broader defini- 
tion of the total air burden, a defini- 
tion that includes new and emerging air 
toxics as well as currently regulated 
pollutants. Also needed is a system for 


addressing diverse pollutant sources and 
the effects of the total air pollution bur- 
den on air, water, and land. Given the 
lower and perhaps more uncertain 
thresholds associated with the total air 
burden, EPA should shift its focus from 
the regulation of single pollutants to the 
control of multiple pollutants based on 
comparative risk estimates. Integrated 
assessments of the multimedia effects of 
air-borne pollutants also may be 
needed. 

Finally, because all airsheds are 
interlinked across state and sometimes 
national borders, the long-term protec- 
tion of U.S. air quality will depend to 
some extent on the protection of air 
quality in other countries. The United 
States should continue to provide in- 
ternational leadership in an effort to 
link air quality issues with other envi- 
ronmental, energy, social, and 
economic concerns. 

Non-Traditional Environmental Stressors 

Up to this point in its history, EPA has 
paid attention to-and attempted to 
control-only a limited number of en- 
vironmental stressors (e.g., the most 
ubiquitous hazardous air pollutants and 
a limited number of drinking water con- 
taminants and pesticide residues in 
food). EPA currently requires U.S. com- 
panies to regularly monitor only those 
chemicals likely to be released and 
therefore limited by permits and regu- 


lations. Larger companies are required 
to report, facility-by-facility, their re- 
leases of about 325 toxic chemicals. 
U.S. wastewater treatment facilities 
have to monitor and control a relatively 
small number of well-recognized pollut- 
ants. For infectious diseases, the indi- 
cator species monitored in drinking 
water and coastal beach waters are, at 
best, only crude indicators of infectious 
risk. 

Because future environmental 
quality may be at risk from environmen- 
tal stressors other than the chemical 
and microbiological contaminants 
monitored and regulated in the past, 
EPA needs to improve its capabilities 
to identify, understand, and, if neces- 
sary, target for control a greater num- 
ber of those stressors that could lead to 
future risks. Examples of some poten- 
tially important stressors not presently 
monitored include the new technolo- 
gies that could increase human expo- 
sure to various forms of non-ionizing 
radiation, the persistent chlorinated 
hydrocarbons that could disrupt endo- 
crine systems in humans and animals, 
and the newly-recognized pathogens 
that are being found in drinking water. 
EPA should attempt to identify, moni- 
tor, and analyze the most potentially se- 
rious of these unconventional stressors, 
and then assess their adverse effects on 
human health and ecological systems. 



Health of the Oceans 

Although indications of deterioration 
in ocean health are still preliminary 
and subject to scientific debate, the 
scope and value of the resource at risk 
are undeniably enormous. Thus the 
early warning signs of possible ocean 
deterioration-the “dot on the hori- 
zon”-should be taken seriously. Co- 
ordinated, international steps should 
be taken now to better define the 
causes and effects of ocean pollution, 
and to anticipate problems that may 
require a coordinated international 
response in the future. 

For example, much more needs to 
be known about conditions and trends 
in the open ocean. Current adverse ef- 
fects already evident in the oceans need 
to be monitored more widely and bet- 
ter understood. Although the effects of 
overfishing on human nutrition and in- 
ternational economics are apparent, 
more needs to be learned about the ef- 
fect of these “holes” in the food web on 
other marine organisms. 

Further, international coopera- 
tion is needed to gather and analyze 
information that now is scattered 
among different agencies and coun- 
tries. This effort is essential to iden- 
tifying gaps in knowledge and direct- 
ing future research. Coordinated ac- 
tion should include studies of the life 
cycles of ocean flora and fauna, sam- 
pling and analysis of their tissues and 


the ocean’s waters and sediments, and 
efforts to expand current understand- 
ing of marine toxicology, 
ecotoxicology, and the relationships 
between coastal and deep waters and 
between oceanic and terrestrial en- 
vironments. 

These types of studies will require 
many years of coordinated international 
effort. Given the early warning signals 
now being observed, and the value of 
oceans to long-term economic and eco- 
system sustainability, such coordinated 
efforts should begin as soon as possible. 


Recommendation 4 

EPA should stimulate coordinated 
national efforts to anticipate and 
respond to environmental change. 

In its report Reducing Risk (Septem- 
ber 1990), the SAB recommended 
that EPA increase its efforts to inte- 
grate environmental considerations 
into broader aspects of public policy. 
That recommendation was based on 
a finding that environmental quality 
is affected by national policies related 
to energy use, agriculture, economic 
development, transportation, and for- 
eign relations. Consequently, EPA 
was advised to work closely with the 
appropriate Federal agencies to en- 


sure their policies are sensitive to po- 
tential environmental impacts. 

Since 1990, this integration of en- 
vironmental considerations into 
broader national policy has taken place 
in a number of areas. For example, EPA 
has worked fruitfully with the Depart- 
ment of Transportation to implement 
the Intermodal Surface Transportation 
Efficiency Act (ISTEA), and the 
Agency is playing an important role 
working with the Department of 
Energy’s implementation of the Energy 
Policy Act. EPA has participated with 
a number of Federal agencies to develop 
its Environmental Monitoring and As- 
sessment Program (EMAP) and the 
National Human Exposure Assessment 
Survey (NHEXAS). This progress is 
encouraging. 

The same kind of cooperation is 
needed to anticipate, and respond to, 
potential environmental risks in the 
future. EPA should develop stronger 
partnerships with other Federal agen- 
cies, state governments, and relevant 
non-government organizations in- 
volved in futures-related activities. In 
particular, EPA should undertake coop- 
erative efforts to: 1) improve and inte- 
grate environment-related futures re- 
search; 2) focus national attention on 
drivers of environmental change; 3) im- 
prove environmental education and 
awareness; and 4) develop an integrated 
environmental data system. 



Improve and Integrate Environment-Related 
Futures Research 


A number of Federal agencies, private 
businesses, and non-government orga- 
nizations currently conduct foresight 
activities, but those activities tend to 
be discontinuous-depending on bud- 
gets-and coordinated poorly, if at all. 
EPA should work with them to improve 
the methodologies used in futures re- 
search, strengthen the linkages between 
the various efforts, and ensure that the 
environmental implications of futures 
research are not ignored. 

In particular, EPA may wish to 
conduct its own analysis of the envi- 
ronmental implications of futures re- 
search at other Federal agencies, or it 
may choose to work with the primary 
agency involved. In any case, EPA 
should work to make Federal foresight 
efforts thorough, complementary, and 
supportive of environmental policy- 
making. 

Moreover, EPA should reach out 
to private businesses, state govern- 
ments, and to other agencies and orga- 
nizations within and outside the United 
States that have experience in futures 
research, especially environmental fu- 
tures research. Such research should 
feed into and complement EPA’s work. 
In fact, one of the most important con- 
tributions that EPA could make in this 
area is to help establish a forceful Fed- 
eral presence that helps link the valu- 


able foresight activities being con- 
ducted elsewhere. 

Finally, EPA should work with 
other organizations to improve the un- 
derstanding and expand the use of en- 
vironment-related futures research by 
other parts of the Federal government. 
The U.S. Congress and the science of- 
fices in the White House, for example, 
should use environmental foresight 
more extensively in their activities. 
EPA can help make that happen. 

Focus National Attention on Drivers o 
Environmental Change 

Because of historical circumstances and 
its legislative mandates, EPA has 
tended to focus its energies on the en- 
vironmental end results of broad eco- 
nomic, demographic, and technologi- 
cal changes ( e.g., controlling emissions 
from cars and forcing changes in fuel 
to reduce urban ozone pollution, im- 
proving the design and operation of 
landfills and incinerators to minimize 
waste-related contamination of soil and 
groundwater). Only recently has EPA 
begun to attack the roots of such prob- 
lems (e.g., influencing the design of 
consumer products to reduce environ- 
mental impacts, encouraging reductions 
in waste streams through pollution pre- 
vention). 

To limit or avoid future environ- 
mental problems, the nation and EPA 
must pay more attention to the forces- 


or drivers-behind those problems. The 
increased concentration of people in 
urban corridors; the development and 
use of new technologies, manufacturing 
processes, and materials; the expanded 
use of fossil fuels both in this country 
and abroad: these kinds of future, large- 
scale changes are likely to give impetus 
to new kinds of environmental prob- 
lems that demand new kinds of re- 
sponses. To the extent that the Ameri- 
can people and EPA understand-and 
anticipate-the drivers of change, and 
then take action to avoid the problems 
they may engender, the risks and costs 
imposed on future generations will be 
reduced. 

For example, EPA may not be able 
to influence the growth of heavily- 
populated urban transportation corri- 
dors, but anticipating that growth be- 
fore the fact, and recognizing that such 
growth may overwhelm current tech- 
niques and technologies for controlling 
air pollution, may give EPA and other 
agencies the head start they need to 
develop new, more effective options for 
remediation. Similarly, by anticipating 
the future widespread use of new mate- 
rials (in the batteries of electric ve- 
hicles, for example), EPA could begin 
to assess potential recycling, reuse, and 
disposal problems. 

In short, future environmental 
conditions are likely to be shaped in 
large part by forces of change already 



evident. EPA should not wait for those 
conditions to manifest themselves be- 
fore the Agency begins to formulate its 
response. It should begin studying the 
forces of change now, and then give the 
nation an early evaluation of how those 
changes could affect the environment. 

Improve Environmental Awareness 
Education 

One of the single most important driv- 
ers of environmental change in the fu- 
ture will be the environmental aware- 
ness and attitudes of people in this 
country and abroad. Environmental 
awareness influences individual behav- 
ior, and individual behavior is a funda- 
mental factor affecting environmental 
conditions. A country’s environmental 
laws and institutions are shaped by the 
environmental awareness of its citizens, 
as awareness is translated into policy. 
Because environmental awareness will 
exert such a strong influence on future 
environmental conditions, EPA’s efforts 
to anticipate and respond to future en- 
vironmental problems should include a 
strengthened commitment to environ- 
mental information and education. 

In its 1990 report Reducing Risk, 
the SAB made a similar recommenda- 
tion in the context of expanding the 
types of tools used to reduce risk. The 
SAB recommended that EPA use infor- 
mation and education, among other 
things, to complement the Agency’s 


and 

more traditional command-and-control 
regulatory approach. Information and 
education clearly are the most useful 
risk reduction tools for certain kinds of 
environmental problems, and, as dem- 
onstrated by EPA’s pollution prevention 
and environmental education pro- 
grams, the Agency has been using those 
tools more often and more effectively 
over the past few years. 

Seen in the context of potential 
future environmental problems, the 
improved environmental awareness of 
the general public is even more impor- 
tant. An informed and alert public 
serves, in fact, as a broad-based look- 
out panel that can see and draw atten- 
tion to the first signs of unusual envi- 
ronmental degradation in the future. 
An aware and concerned public will be 
more likely to volunteer to collect the 
sampling data (e.g., during nationwide 
bird counts and beach cleanups) that is 
useful in illustrating particular environ- 
mental conditions. Most important, a 
public that is sensitive to the environ- 
mental implications of personal behav- 
ior will be more willing to act quickly 


“A country’s 
environmental laws and 
institutions are shaped 
by the environmental 
awareness of its citizens, 
as awareness is 
translated into policy.” 


if behavioral changes are needed in re- 
sponse to future environmental 
problems. 

While EPA is only one of several 
government agencies that have a role 
in providing public education and in- 
formation, it has the primary Federal re- 
sponsibility for environmental protec- 
tion. Consequently, it is appropriate for 
EPA to take the lead in formulating a 
national environmental education and 
information program explicitly focused 
on environmental futures. Key partici- 
pants in this effort should include state 



and local school administrators, teach- 
ers, parents, students, businesses, and 
the media. 

Futures-oriented environmental 
education also should be promoted on 
an international basis. Given the im- 
portant linkages between personal be- 
havior and cultural values-and their 
influential role in national economic 
and environmental policies-informa- 
tion as to how citizens can improve en- 
vironmental quality will be a critical 
component in reducing future environ- 
mental risks. Multilateral institutions 
and non-government organizations are 
especially suited for funding and imple- 
menting environmental education and 
awareness programs in cooperation with 
national and local governments. 

Develop an Integrated Environmental 
Data System 

To better understand the different 
mechanisms of future environmental 
stress, and the range of possible human 
health and ecosystem effects, EPA 
should begin working with states, in- 
dustry, other Federal agencies, and in- 
ternational organizations to construct 
a broad, integrated database that could 
be used to link perceived or suspected 
effects with possible stressors. Such a 
database would help users identify pre- 
viously undetected and incipient eco- 
logical or human health changes. Data 
analysis could provide early-warning 


signals of increased human or ecosys- 
tem exposures to conventional and un- 
conventional stressors. When com- 
bined with improved understanding of 
biological responses to such exposures, 
this analysis could help guide policy and 
action well before severe ecological and 
human health effects were documented. 

Before trends in atmospheric, 
aquatic, and soil contamination can be 
studied, baseline data must be collected 
over a sustained period from a network 
of background sampling stations. Data 
collected at such stations, whether they 
are fixed-site, mobile, or satellite moni- 
toring systems, have to be subject to 
quality-control and made available to 
analysts inside and outside government. 
Most important, these data have to fit 
together to paint a consistent, coher- 
ent picture of environmental quality. In 
other words, if the data to be included 
are selected carefully, their analytical 
value in the aggregate will be greater 
than the value of their separate parts. 

Much of the data needed for such 
a database already is being collected by 
EPA and other agencies. For example, 
earth-observing satellite systems oper- 
ated by the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (NASA) cur- 
rently collect data on vegetative growth 
patterns, atmospheric haze, and trace 
gases. A National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey (NHANES) is 
conducted on a regular basis by the 


Department of Health and Human Ser- 
vices (DHHS). EPA collects an enor- 
mous amount of data related to air qual- 
ity, drinking water quality, human ex- 
posure (NHEXAS), and ecological sta- 
tus and trends (EMAP), among other 
things. The Fish and Wildlife Service, 
the Forest Service, the National 
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Ad- 
ministration, scientists under contract 
to the National Science Foundation, 
and others collect data describing a va- 
riety of environmental conditions. The 
Federal and state health care systems 
collect detailed information on overall 
U.S. mortality and morbidity rates, 
while DHHS and various states collect 
occupational health and exposure data 
in surveillance networks. 

A particularly useful, and previ- 
ously unavailable, source of environ- 
mental data is the Department of De- 
fense (DOD). DOD already has in place 
data-gathering equipment and data- 
bases useful for assessing global-scale 
ecosystems. EPA should tap into DOD’s 
expertise in this area, and integrate 
DOD’s equipment and methods with 
more traditional environmental data- 
gathering efforts. 

As evidenced by this partial list of 
Federal data-gathering activities, the 
problem in constructing an integrated 
data network useful for anticipating fu- 
ture environmental issues is not neces- 
sarily the need for more data or larger 



data collection budgets. Rather, the 
challenge will be to assemble useful data 
already being collected into a coherent 
database that is accessible to a wide 
variety of users. 

EPA should review the different 
kinds of environmental and health sur- 
veillance data currently available, and 
then identify the set that is potentially 
most useful for anticipating environ- 
mental futures. If there are clear gaps 
in the data, the Agency should recom- 
mend ways for closing those gaps. 
Working with the primary collectors of 
data, EPA should help design a compre- 
hensive system for aggregating critical 
data elements, updating the data, assur- 
ing its quality, and making the infor- 
mation widely available to users inside 
and outside the government, and inside 
and outside the United States. 


Recommendation 5 

EPA, as well as other agencies and 
organizations, should recognize that 
global environmental quality is a 
matter of strategic national interest. 

There is little doubt that political, eco- 
nomic, and environmental events in 
other countries can affect environmen- 
tal quality in the United States. Even 
when such events do not affect the U.S. 
environment directly, as with the oil 


fires in Kuwait, they can affect inter- 
national environmental and economic 
resources in which the United States 
has a strategic interest. Consequently, 
to protect both the national interest 
and the quality of the U.S. environ- 
ment over the long term, it is essential 
that global environmental quality be 
recognized-publicly and formally-as 
a strategic interest of the United States. 

In the past, the role of environ- 
mental issues in U.S. foreign policy has 
been determined on a case-by-case ba- 
sis. An overall, strategic environmen- 
tal policy has never been defined for 
this country. U.S. foreign policy objec- 
tives related to the environment have 
not been articulated, environmental 
risk contingencies have not been iden- 
tified, and the criteria for various lev- 
els of U.S. action in the face of an en- 
vironmental emergency have not been 
laid out. 

This shortfall in strategic thinking 
could be detrimental in a future where 
international competition for natural 
resources like ocean fish and potable 
water may pose as much of a threat to 
international political stability as an 
interrupted oil supply does today. More- 
over, environmental terrorism, the 
large-scale dislocation and migration of 
people because of deteriorating envi- 
ronmental conditions, and the rapid 
growth and urbanization of global popu- 
lations all could pose potential risks to 


global environmental quality. 

In this context, the protection of 
environmental quality represents one of 
the most important strategic issues fac- 
ing the United States in the 21st cen- 
tury. To anticipate and forestall the en- 
vironmental problems of the future, the 
United States must begin to develop 
strategic national policies that link na- 
tional security, foreign relations, envi- 
ronmental quality, and economic 
growth. EPA should play a strongly sup- 
portive role in this process. 

Over a number of years, the U.S. 
government-including EPA-has 
undertaken a series of cooperative en- 
vironmental activities with other 
countries such as China, Russia, and 
Japan. EPA is contributing to an en- 
vironmental office in Budapest to as- 
sist Central European countries re- 
dress the environmental problems 
created and neglected while they 
were part of the Soviet Bloc. These 
efforts, and others like them in the 
Caribbean region and Asia, contrib- 
ute U.S. experience and technical ex- 
pertise to cooperative efforts aimed 
at remediating existing environmen- 
tal problems in other parts of the 
world. 

The U.S. Government should ex- 
pand such cooperative international ac- 
tivities and target them not only at ex- 
isting problems but also at the larger 
forces or drivers (e.g., population 



growth and urbanization, increased fos- 
sil fuel use, technological develop- 
ments, environmental attitudes) that 
may contribute to future problems. Be- 
sides helping other countries control air 
pollution in urban areas, for example, 
EPA should be prepared to assist them 
in identifying options for minimizing 
such problems in the first place (i.e., 
through the use of alternative fuels or 
innovative energy-efficient technolo- 
gies). In other words, as EPA begins to 
anticipate future environmental prob- 
lems in this country, the Agency should 
join with other nations to apply the 
same process internationally. 


While EPA’s technical and fi- 
nancial involvement in such activi- 
ties may provide substantial benefits 
to other countries, this work also sup- 
ports a well-defined national self-in- 
terest. EPA simply will not be able to 
anticipate, and respond to, U.S. en- 
vironmental problems in the future 
without considering the drivers of 
change in other countries, and with- 
out involving other countries, mul- 
tilateral institutions, and non-gov- 
emment organizations. In the future, 
many of the same environmental 
problems that emerge in other coun- 
tries are likely to emerge here, and 


they are likely to be linked. 

Many facets of this kind of 
broad, futures-oriented activity lie 
outside EPA’s area of expertise. Some 
nations, for example, may request and 
need assistance in areas such as popu- 
lation planning and alternative fuels 
development, where other U.S. agen- 
cies hold the primary responsibility. 
Consequently, EPA should join with 
other Federal agencies, multilateral 
institutions, and non-government or- 
ganizations in futures-oriented part- 
nerships beyond its borders. 



The Reports of The SAB 
Standing Committees 


The Environmental Futures Committee invited the standing committees of the SAB to conduct futures exercises in their 
areas of expertise, and then prepare reports on their conclusions and recommendations. The five reports that resulted from 
this effort are summarized below. Anyone wishing a copy of these reports should write or call: 


Committee Evaluation and Support Staff 
Science Advisory Board 
401 M St., S. W. (Mail Stop 1400) 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
(202) 260-8414 


Report of the Drinking Water Committee (epa sab dwc 95 002 ) 

The Drinking Water Committee examined trends in water resource demands, water treatment technologies, and drinking water quality, 
and their likely impacts on the country’s ability to provide safe drinking water in the future. The committee offered five major recommendations: 


1. Improve the existing management of renewable water resources. 

A national program to improve existing renewable water 
supplies should include: 1) prevention of further water supply 
deterioration and better management of land-use and forestry 
practices; 2) improved ability to capture a larger portion of 
renewable water supplies, including through wetland protection 
and expansion; and 3) implementation of water recycling and 
conservation practices to improve efficiencies of water use, 
including lining of irrigation canals, installation of more efficient 
plumbing, and consideration of reallocation of water rights. 

2. Support the consolidation of small distribution systems. 

Consolidation of small water systems should be encouraged to 
improve the overall quality of water and provide the necessary 
revenue to implement treatment technologies now available to 
the larger systems. The drive toward consolidation should take 
advantage of the replacement of distribution systems that will 
be necessary in the near future in many communities. 

3. Support changes in treatment technologies. 

The traditional concepts of water treatment and distribution 
can be expected to change substantially in the future as a 
result of the changing profiles of contaminants of concern. A 
number of promising technologies, including membrane 
treatment, will need to be improved and implemented. In 


addition, methods will need to be developed for stabilizing 
water in distribution systems that do not depend on 
maintenance of a residual oxidant. 

4. Greatly accelerate research to spur advances in risk assessment 
methodologies for both chemical and microbiological 
contaminants. 

Modifications of current water disinfection treatments must 
consider the magnitude of microbial risks that may be introduced 
as a result of those modifications, as well as the creation of 
other disinfection by-products. To do this effectively, substantial 
research into risk assessment methodology for both chemical 
and microbial risks is needed. Without such research, large public 
investments for changes in drinking water treatment plants may 
be made on an inadequate and possibly incorrect scientific basis. 

5. Establish a surveillance or alert system for emerging water-borne 
pathogens. 

The almost certain changes in water treatment and distribution 
systems in the next decades, and the increased consolidation 
into larger systems for efficiency of control and delivery, pose 
the possibility of generating and transmitting to large populations 
heretofore unknown microorganisms that may pose serious 
health risks. A surveillance or alert system to detect these 
microorganisms early should be put in place. 



Report of the Ecological Processes and 
Effects Committee (epa-sab-epec-95-oo3) 

The Ecological Processes and Effects Committee developed an 
approach for examining key future developments, and then applied 
it to assess the potential future ecological consequences of human 
activities. Based on its study, the committee came to four key 
conclusions: 

1. The conceptual model for futures analysis, which combines the 
use of scenarios and the analytical framework for ecological risk 
assessment (ecorisk framework), provided a formalized 
approach for assessing future environmental risks. 

2. This approach, when applied to two scenarios making differing 
assumptions about future energy costs, revealed possible 
ecological consequences that probably would not have been 
determined through an unstructured brainstorming. 

3. Attempting to identify the ecological consequences of the two 
different energy scenarios demonstrated to the committee that 
the value of examining futures lies in the process rather than 
the results of that examination. 

4. The committee’s scenarios/futures analysis reaffirmed the 
conclusions in Reducing Risk that national ecological risks are 
dominated by larger-scale and longer-time issues, including 
global climate change and habitat alteration, ozone depletion, 
and the introduction of exotic species. 


Report of the Environmental 
Engineering Committee (epa-sab-eec- 

95-004) 

The Environmental Engineering Committee chose to study four 
technology-related issues that may emerge in the future: 1) fostering 
environmental protection while helping to assure sustained industrial 
development in an increasingly competitive manufacturing 
economy; 2) responding to increasing societal pressures for the 
redevelopment of industrial sites and remediation of land- 
3) preparing to address threats posed to human health and natural 
resources by transient phenomena; and 4) correcting insufficiencies 
in core technical competencies that are needed to address future 
environmental challenges. 

Using a look-out panel, the committee identified eight additional 
issues that EPA should consider evaluating: 1) fossil fuel depletion; 
2) industrial accidents and/or terrorist activities; 3) deterioration of 
urban infrastructure; 4) low-cost benefits of some environmental 
management strategies; 5) reservoirs of environmental 
contaminants; 6) pathogens in drinking water; 7) electromagnetic 
radiation; and 8) industrial ecology. 

Based upon its study, the committee prepared four 
recommendations for EPA: 

1. EPA policy recommendations concerning clean technologies 
should be constructed and balanced carefully to benefit both 
the environment and U.S. industrial competitiveness. 

2. EPA should ensure the development and use of appropriate 
technology to enable the redevelopment of contaminated urban 
industrial sites and remediated land. 

3. EPA should strengthen its capabilities and readiness to address 
potential environmental consequences of natural disasters 
associated with transient events such as river floods and violent 
regional storms, especially considering trends in population 
growth and land use. 

4. EPA should systematically identify and examine the essential 
and distinct scientific and engineering capabilities (core 
competencies) needed to address technical aspects of its 
present and anticipated future mission, and then strengthen them 

where needed. 



Report of the Indoor Air Quality and 
Total Human Exposure Committee 

(EPA-SAB-IAQ-95-005) 

The Indoor Air Quality and Total Human Exposure Committee 
studied opportunities for advances in the science and art of human 
exposure assessment, and the opportunities that such advances 
could offer EPA and the nation for improving risk assessment and 
management. The committee recognized that significant advances 
could be made in three critical areas: 

. Microsensor and microprocessor technologies; 

. Biomarkers of exposure; and 
. Database resources. 

Based upon its study, the committee prepared five specific 
recommendations to EPA: 

1. Develop a mechanism to support the research, validation, and 
application of: a) more sensitive and specific microsensors, 
biomarkers, and other monitoring technologies and approaches 
for measuring exposures; and b) validated data on associated 
exposure determinants, including demographic characteristics, 
time-activity patterns, locations of activities, and behavioral and 
lifestyle factors. 

2. Establish a mechanism to develop, validate with field data, and 
iteratively improve models that integrate: a) measurements of 
total exposure and their determinants; b) a better knowledge of 
exposure distributions across different populations; and c) the 
most current understanding of exposure-dose relationships. 

3. Develop, in cooperation with other agencies and stakeholders, 
a robust database that reflects the status and trends in national 
exposure to environmental contaminants. 

4. Develop sustained mechanisms and incentives to ensure a 
greater degree of interdisciplinary collaboration in exposure 
assessment and, by extension, in risk assessment and risk 
management activities. 

5. Take advantage of improving capabilities in exposure 
assessment technology, electronic handling of data, and 
electronic communications to establish and disseminate early 
warnings of emerging environmental stressors. 


Report of the Radiation Advisory 

Committee (EPA-SAB-RAC-95-006) 

The Radiation Advisory Committee (RAC) formed the Radiation 
Environmental Futures Subcommittee to assess future potential 
problems in environmental radiation. The subcommittee scanned 
potential future developments in the field of radiation, particularly 
as they pertained to environmental radiation. Based on its study, 
the subcommittee recommended that EPA consider the following 
activities: 

1. Place greater emphasis on providing scientifically credible 
information, while relying less on a regulatory role in risk 
management. 

2. Participate in the joint development of national energy policies, 
focusing on the overall environmental consequences of different 
energy production options, the roles of alternative energy sources- 
including nuclear electricity generation-in curtailing greenhouse 
gases, potential releases of radioactive materials to the 
environment, radioactive waste management issues, and possible 
increases in ultraviolet radiation. 

3. Incorporate into its program activities research findings related to 
radiation exposures, dose-response models, and radiation effects, 
especially in regard to differences in individual susceptibility. 

4. Provide an environmental perspective to assure control of nuclear 
weapons materials through conversion to energy use and/or secure 
disposal. 

5. Stimulate and track research on the potential health effects of 
exposure to non-ionizing radiation, and provide non-regulatory 
Federal guidance and advice on the prudent avoidance of 
unnecessary risks from potential sources of exposure, if such risks 
are shown to exist. 

6. Provide Federal leadership in activities involving pollution 
prevention, the management and disposal of radioactive wastes, 
and development of criteria and standards for cleanup of sites 
containing radioactive and mixed wastes. 

7. Exercise its Federal radiation guidance role, in collaboration with 
other Federal and state agencies, to reduce human exposure during 
medical uses of radiation. 

8. Continue efforts to characterize potentially high-risk radon regions, 
improve knowledge about radon risks, and develop more accurate 
methods of measuring and mitigating radon in buildings. 

9. Become the primary source of information on environmental 
radiation by providing advice, and guidance where appropriate, on 
the scientific basis for risk management decisions and by identifying 
research needs in radiation-related areas. 

1 0 Use a process of foresight to develop a capability for scanning the 
future in order to be proactive, rather than reactive, in shaping 
environmental radiation policies. 



The technical annex to this report, Futures Methods and issues 
(EPA-SAB-EC-95-007A), provides detailed background material 
prepared by the Environmental Futures Committee of the SAB. 
To receive a copy, contact: 

Committee Evaluation and Support Staff 
Science Advisory Board 
401 M St., S. W. (Mail Stop 1400) 

Washington, D.C. 20460 
(202) 260-8414 




From: 

Sent: 

To: 


Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Wednesday, December BO, 2015 6:57 PM 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Kelenske, Chris 
(MSP); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Becker, 
Timothy (DHHS); Creagh, Keith (DNR); Roberts, John (DTMB) 

Cc: Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 

Subject: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 

Attachments: A Proposal to Create the Flint Water Inter.docx; IA Coord Com Org Chart.jpg; IAP Flint 

Water 2015-12-29.pdf 


Team: 

Today Harvey and I met with the Flint Water Task Force. It was a good meeting. People were pleased with the G's 
statement from the prior day. Captain Kelenske joined us and we had a very good discussion about moving forward with 
the creation of the Flint Water Crisis Agency Coordinating Committee (FIACC). Tim Becker and Captain Kelenske 
provided me with a fair amount of input. I also read the City of Flint Incident Action Plan for a State of Emergency which 
Chris received today (enclosed for those who wish to read it as well). I have distilled all of this into a two page plan that I 
want your edits and comments on and a one page organizational chart (now presented in the "governor's colors" 
according to our fine people in Communications). Spoiler alert— I made Captain Kelenske Vice Chair of the whole 
shebang (with the Colonel's blessing) so Harvey wouldn't get lonely. 

Here is my ask of you: 

1) Within 24 (sooner if you can) hours give me your comments and input 

2) Tomorrow I will turn around a final document for Jarrod to review with the Governor either New Year's Day or 
Saturday 

3) Ideally, Governor will approve Harvey sending it to Mayor Weaver Saturday (Sunday latest) 

4) Mayor needs to know that this is what the Governor wishes to discuss at the meeting January 7 along with 
financial resources that we still need some estimates on cost from DHHS for 

5) Meegan and Dave need to noodle how best to get out front with this and change the narrative focus on 
Monday's Genesee County declaration of emergency 

I know we are all working way too hard for what should be a rest and recharge period but I do appreciate everyone's 
efforts and I know the Boss really does as well. 

Regards, 


Rich 



A Proposal to Create the Flint Water Inter-Agency Coordinating Committee 

(FIACC) 


In collaboration with the Flint After-Action Task Force, MSP Captain Chris Kelenske, DHHS Chief Deputy 
Tim Becker and DHFIS Director Nick Lyon, Harvey Hollins and Rich Baird are recommending the 
immediate creation of the above referenced entity, with its sustained role and responsibility enabled 
under the Governor's Executive Order. 

Statement of Need 

Due to a combination of resource constraints, inexperienced personnel, "silo" bureaucratic processes 
and reactionary approaches to immediate problems, there is a nearly complete lack of coordination, 
communication, and connected management amongst all the departments and stakeholders who must 
work together to ensure Flint's return to clean, safe water and to coordinate mid and long term efforts 
to mitigate and address future health and behavioral consequences from lead ingestion. This group 
MUST be stood up regardless of whether (or when) the conditions required for a declaration of 
emergency are met by the City, County, State or Federal authorizers. This coordinating body must 
include: 

• The creation of a routine information process between all parties. 

• Pursuit of other avenues of funding including federal grants and legislative appropriations. 

• While the Emergency Management Act or the Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act 
may be mechanisms to fix the issues in Flint, portions of the Emergency Management Act outlining 
management of events are applicable and should be implemented without delay (e.g. Local 
emergency operations plans/emergency operations guides as well as emergency operations support 
plans). 

Action Plan and Establishing the FIACCC 

It appears that a request for a Governor's declaration may be from the county as soon as January 4, 
2016. The state's Emergency Coordinator (Capt. Kelenske) will evaluate the request and provide a 
recommendation whether to issue a declaration, following established protocol and due diligence. But 
immediately, we will: 


1 . Establish an interagency workgroup Chaired and Vice-Chaired by Harvey Hollins and Chris Kelenske, 
respectively, and be comprised of DHHS, MDEQ, MSP, Treasury, Genesee County, City of Flint, MDE, 
LARA and external Subject Matter Experts (SMEs). Civil Rights may be added at a later time. If 
additional agencies/stakeholders who can assist with accomplishing the action plan are needed, 
they will be added. Personnel must be goal oriented, transparent with findings and measures of 
progress, and able to work toward accomplishing the Incident Action Plan created by the state in a 
timely manner. A draft Organization Chart is attached under separate cover. 

2. This body should be created by Executive Order and it must complement and not replace the 
current system under the Emergency Management Act. In fact, it should demonstrate how to best 
leverage support where existing laws fall short under a man-made emergency. 

3. Utilize the National Incident Management System and Unified/Incident Command as appropriate. 

4. Establish routine communications protocols at the operational, executive, and legislative levels as 
determined appropriate. 

5. Establish interagency workgroup objectives using the following as a starting point. 

Interagency Workgroup Objectives 

1 . Determine and convey acceptable standards for potable water. 





■ Identify needed remediation. 

■ Convey the remediation plan objectives to all stakeholders and interested parties. 

■ Logistics plan for distribution and serving homebound citizens with water and 
filtration 

■ Implement the plan. 

2. Determine health impacts for the impacted population. 

■ Identify treatment methods. 

■ Nutrition education and support 

■ Coping with lead exposure (care, monitoring, neurodevelopmental screening, access 
to DBP specialists, psychologists/psychiatrists, expanded county services, etc.) 

■ Convey the treatment plan objectives to interested parties. 

■ Implement the plan. 

3. Establish a public information protocol to effectively inform the community of the situation 
and actions taken. 

■ Identify existing Public Information outlets within the city, county, and state. 

■ Establish a Joint Information Center 

■ Provide for Emergency Alerts and Updates 

■ Leverage public and private education schools 

■ Determine official information flow and approval of information. 

■ Convey to interested parties. 

4. Assess the status of the infrastructure and determine feasible actions to upgrade the water 
system. 

■ Determine current state of the infrastructure. 

■ Develop priorities, costs, and potential funding sources for infrastructure upgrades 
as part of a long term recovery plan. 

■ Seek partners to assist (NGOs, Foundations, Business, etc.) 

■ Implement the plan. 

Final Thoughts 

After the team provides input to this document, I would ask that Governor Snyder review and approve 
the approach, authorize Harvey Hollins to get the plan to Mayor Weaver no later than this weekend, and 
then proactively communicate the plan regardless of whether we get an Emergency declaration or not. 

Also, we do believe setting up an Emergency Command Center which requires 24/7 staffing is sensible 
until AFTER Genesee County has demonstrated they did all they could and couldn't solve the problem. 
That is what is required under the law. 






CITY OF FLINT 

INCIDENT ACTION PLAN 

STATE OF EMERGENCY 


Objectives: 


To provide short term relief and long term solutions in addressing the man-made emergency of 
increased lead levels in the City of Flint (the "City") water system resulting from the switch to Flint River 
as the City's water source as well as the threat to public health related to elevated blood lead levels in 
Flint residents, without interruption of the provision of public safety and other essential public services. 
Due to the fluidic nature of emergencies and the complexity of the City of Flint's declared emergency, 
this plan serves as a framework and may be altered as the emergency develops. 

The Response Framework 

The purpose of this plan is to organize efforts on behalf of the city to assess the extent of the City's 
infrastructure needs and risks to public health, provide immediate relief to those who are at risk, and 
establish long term solutions. In addition, the city must ascertain what immediate relief and long term 
solutions the City is capable of implementing based on what resources are available. For any activities 
that are beyond the resource capacity of the City, external sources of funding, supplies, and manpower 
must be sought. 

There are a number of steps that must be taken in accordance with the Flint Emergency Support 
Operations Plan (SEOP), in order for the City to be compliant with the Genesee County Emergency 
Action Guidelines. These include the activation of the Incident Management Team, the Emergency 
Operation Center, and the sharing of essential documents with the County, including this plan. 
Information must also be shared by the City's Public Information Officer on a regular basis, as required 
by the SEOP. 

This plan calls for the provision of immediate relief to those at risk in our community. Special 
consideration must be given to residents who belong to underserved groups, such as those who are 
homebound, undocumented, in poverty, etc. Additional consideration must also be given to the 
equitable provision of services throughout our community in order to equally protect the health and 
safety of every member of our community. 

Implementation of this plan is to be conducted by the Incident Management Team, which will monitor 
the effective delivery of goods and services in order to address the conditions of the emergency. 

Understanding the Issue: 

October 1, 2015, the Genesee County Health Department issued a Public Health Emergency after 
elevated blood-lead levels were found among children in the City of Flint. This incident correlates with 
elevated levels of lead found in the City's drinking water after the City switched water sources in April of 


2014 to the Flint River. The scope of this problem appears to be limited to Flint City Water Customers 
and their dependents. Public agencies from several levels of government, as well as charitable, nonprofit 
organizations have partnered with the City to provide immediate relief to Flint residents, including the 
expansion of health services, the provision of bottled water and NSF rated water filters. The city is also 
seeking long term infrastructure improvements to eliminate lead and other contaminants from the 
water system. 

Gov. Rick Snyder appointed a task force to review "actions regarding water use and testing in Flint" and 
to make recommendations for future guidelines: Members of the state task force are Ken Sikkema of 
Public Sector Consultants, Chris Kolb of the Michigan Environmental Council, Dr. Matthew Davis of the 
University of Michigan Health System, Eric Rothstein of the Galardi Rothstein Group and Dr. Lawrence 
Reynolds of Mott Children's Health Center. 

In an effort to halt the further escalation of this crisis, the City returned to receiving its water from the 
Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (DWSD) on October 16, 2015. Since that time, additional 
corrosion control program has started, estimating a reduction of lead levels over the next six months. In 
light of these efforts, concerns surrounding the quality of water and health of the residents persist to 
the point that Mayor Karen Weaver declared a State of Emergency on December 14, 2015 so as to 
resolve this crisis once and for all. 

The current challenge facing the City is providing immediate relief and long term solutions of the quality 
of the water and health of residents while the City remains in a financially critical condition. It is hoped 
and expected that higher levels of government recognize this emergency as it pertains to the condition 
of the City's infrastructure and health of its residents, and do all things necessary to assist the City in the 
provision of relief and the execution of capital improvement projects that will eliminate the causes of 
this emergency. 

Enhancing Understanding: 

Information Collection 

Essential Elements of Information (EEls) can be qualified as the City's water tests containing lead results, 
the verification of lead water lines (both public and private), and health information. Water testing is 
performed by the City's water plant in cooperation with the MDEQ.. The verification of lead water lines is 
being handled by University of Michigan Flint, who is currently digitizing the City's water line 
information and PSI Engineering, who is initiating the effort to verify lead lines by excavating an initial 
150 residential lines. This information allows the Incident Management Team to assess the current 
condition of the emergency by way of determining the water quality and the condition of the water 
distribution infrastructure. 


Information Analysis 

The City has sought partners to assist in the analysis and attenuation of complex data. Wayne State 
University's center for Urban Studies has agreed to assist the City in its efforts to document and track 
lead water lines, water test results, and filter distribution with geographic information system (GIS) 
technology. This allows for easily updateable, digestible information to be presented to officials. 

Assessment of Impacts 

The City will need assistance in determining the total cost of damage done to the public health and 
infrastructure. As of now, only portions of this damage are visible. 

PSI is providing some assistance by excavating 150 residential water lines to verify that they are 
comprised of lead. This is an initial step, but not enough. More resources will be needed to continue this 
process. 

Continuous Situational Awareness 

It is important that the Emergency Management Team receive continuous information regarding water 
testing results, lead water line numbers, and filter distribution information in order to gain a realistic 
and current perspective. Much of his information is currently available on the City's website 
(cityofflint.com) and more is added each week by the PIO team. 

Actions taken in Response to the Emergency 

Activation of the Incident Management Team 

Upon the declaration of Emergency by Mayor Weaver, the Support Emergency Operations Plan (SEOP) 
was activated. The SEOP calls upon the Incident Management Team to generate the Incident Action Plan 
(IAP. Each member of this team serves a specific function as it relates to addressing the causes and 
effects of the emergency. The Emergency Management Team roster can be found in the SEOP on page 
3, with a list of alternates on page 4 in case the need for succession arises. 

Emergency Operations Center 

The Emergency Operations Center (EOC) must be activated upon the declaration of a State of 
Emergency by the Mayor. This center is required by the SEOP and serves as a nerve center for the 
Incident Management Team. Here, emergency relief efforts are coordinated by key members of the 
Incident Management Team. In this case, these relief efforts consist of the distribution of water filters at 



City Hall and community events, the distribution of bottled water throughout the city in conjunction 
with the efforts of community partners, and assisting with the circulation of water testing kits 
throughout the community. The EOC will also be monitoring and managing the inventory of relief 
supplies, such as water filters and bottled water. 

According to the SEOP, the EOC must establish an incident tracking system. This system will serve as a 
work plan for the management of the emergency. In addition, it is essential that the IMT record water 
testing results, lead water line location information, and information about the distribution of water 
filters and bottled water all in one place so that information is readily available for the Incident 
Management Team. This information will also be sent out to the public and media in the form of daily 
regular updates by the City's PIO. 

Communication 

The EOC maintains a telephone system that exists to intake questions about relief efforts and to 
organize relief logistics. It is open from 8am to 5pm, Monday through Friday. A voicemail system and 
eventual email system will exist to handle requests and inquiries that occur outside of the normal 
operating hours. This system will be constructed by the City's IS department. 

Public Awareness and Education 

1. Emergency Alerts and Updates: 

The City's Public Information Officer will make available information as it relates to the 
emergency in the form of press releases, emails, and physical documents. Daily updates 
containing information on the distribution of water filters, bottled water, water testing, blood 
lead testing, and other relief efforts will be available on the City's website for the public to view. 
Information will be available at City Hall for residents. 

2. Joint Information Center: 

The City's PIO will establish a joint Information Center that is organized to coordinate the efforts 
of multiple agencies to communicate with the public. This includes the circulation of joint press 
releases, public health information, educational materials, and updates relating to the State of 
Emergency. This committee is comprised of public information officers and public relations 
personnel to coordinate efforts to keep the public updated and informed. Regular updates to 
the media regarding events and progress will be made as news develops. 

The US EPA has offered assistance in the form of Public Information support. Additional support 
in this area has been provided by the Michigan State Police. 


3. Education: 

Many government agencies and philanthropic organizations are already distributing information 
regarding the effects of lead on public health. It is important that the City assist in these efforts 
so vital information and knowledge is presented to all members of the community. The goal is to 
continue to eliminate misunderstandings and incorrect information as it relates to reducing lead 
in drinking water, pursuing medical help, and maintaining a healthy diet to reduce lead 
absorption in the body. Lead education is currently being performed by the Genesee County 
Health Department, the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services and Medical 
community at-large. 


Assessment of Social Needs 

In order to effectively and equitably provide immediate relief to Flint water customers, the City must 
take into account many of the socio-economic needs and limitations of the community. Some residents 
cannot get to City Hall for a water filter. Some residents do not have internet access. Literacy or a 
language barrier may also pose significant obstacles to the effective distribution of educational 
information and relief to those in need. These will be continuing challenges facing the community. At 
present these are the resources the City has available to mitigate some of those challenges. 

Logistics 


Logistics are being coordinated by the City Emergency Management Team's City's Chief Logistics Officer, 
who is the City Administrator. The CLO is responsible for the coordination, procurement, and 
transportation of goods and services, which is essential for effective implementation of the response 
plan. 

Fixed Distribution Points 

There are several locations throughout the city where residents may acquire a water filter. These 
locations are: 


Flint City Hall 

1101 South Saginaw, Flint Ml 48502 

Genesee County Community Action Resource Department (GCCARD) 

601 North Saginaw, Flint Ml 48502 
and 

2727 Lippencott Blvd, Flint Ml 48507 



Michigan Department of Health and Human Services 

4809 Clio Road, Flint Ml 48504 
and 

125 E. Union Street, Flint, Ml 48502 

Activation of Ward Distribution Centers 

Each of the nine wards will have activated distribution centers that are primarily managed by City 
Council Members or their designees. 


Flint City Council - Water Distribution Sites 


WARD 

COUNCILPERSON 

LOCATION 

ADDRESS 

1 

Eric Mays 

Hasselbring Senior Center 

1002 W. Home Avenue 

2 

Jackie Poplar 

Joy Tabernacle Church 

2505 N. Chevrolet Avenue 

3 

Kerry Nelson 

Antioch Baptist Church 

1083 E. Stewart Avenue 

4 

Joshua Freeman 

Flint Fire Station No. 5 

3402 Western Road 

5 

Wantwaz Davis 

Doyle/Ryder Elementary School 

1040 N. Saginaw Street 

6 

Herbert Winfrey 

New Community Baptist Church 

1375 Lavender Avenue 

7 

Monica Galloway 

Brennan Community Center 

1301 Pingree Avenue 

8 

Vicki VanBuren 

Flint Southwestern Academy 

1420 W. 12 th Street 

9 

Scott Kincaid 

Dort Mall Police Service Station 

3600 S. Dort Highway 


Mobile Distribution Centers 

With the help of transportation agencies, like the Metro Transit Authority (MTA), meals on wheels, and 
GCCARD, the city can help establish mobile distribution centers and delivery systems that can provide 
water filters, bottled water, and nutritious foods, among other types of relief accompanied by 
educational materials to neighborhoods and to homes of people who experience limited mobility. 

• Mass Transportation Authority-MTA bus passes: Assisting residents with bus passes to 
improve their mobility will increase their chances of receiving help. Transportation 
services will also improve residents' access to medical care. 

• MTA-Your Ride mobile distribution: 

0 Estimated Costs: $25 per hour to deliver water and filters to homes throughout 
the City. 

Problem 1. Public Health Emergency 

The first objective in addressing this emergency is reducing, and eventually eliminating, the danger to 
public health. As City water coming out of faucets continue to contain lead, and copper and other 


7 


































harmful contaminants exceeding government guidelines and regulations, it poses a risk to the people of 
our community. Preventative measures must be taken to avoid the effects of toxicosis that are difficult if 
not impossible to completely reverse. 

As far as preventative measures are concerned, education, water filters, and bottled water must be 
provided to every household in the City in order to reduce the chances of lead exposure, especially to 
our most vulnerable members of the community. If lead exposure has occurred, resulting in elevated 
blood lead levels, immediate and sustained medical attention must be available to those affected. 

Health services must be expanded in the area to accommodate increased numbers of case loads and 
specialized care regarding lead poisoning and its effects. 

Immediate Relief for Public Health: 

1. Prevention: Education, water filters and replacement cartridges, free water testing, and bottled 
water must be available to everyone. 

2. Access to nutritious food that reduces the risks of lead absorption by the body. The City can 
coordinate activities with the County Health Department 

Long Term Solutions: Maintaining Public Health and Coping with Lead Exposure 

1. Work closely with the Genesee County Health Department and Michigan Department of Health 
and Human Services in order to provide sustainable care and monitoring of children exposed to 
lead. This care must be available for them for several years-preferably several decades. 

2. Support and education for primary care providers regarding aggressive long-term 
neurodevelopmental screening and testing. 

3. Improved access to developmental and behavioral (DBP) specialists, pediatric psychologists, 
pediatric psychiatrists. 

a. Pre-emptive referral to mental health/ toxic stress screenings. 

b. Support capacity building and or incentivize recruitment to allow Genesee health system 
(CMH) to build this capacity which is currently needed and lacking. 

4. Increase recognition and education regarding trauma informed care, social determinants of 
health (SDOH). 

5. Expand State funded Genesee Health System (CMH) services. 

a. Infant mental health (30 day capacity) 

b. Child case management 

c. Home based services 

d. Trauma informed care- trauma focused CBT 

Problem 2. Lead Contamination in the Water 
Immediate Relief: 


1. Education, water filters and replacement cartridges, free water testing for water customers, and 
bottled water must be available to everyone. Water filters can be obtained at any of the fixed 
distribution points throughout the City. 

2. Identification and verification of lead water service lines throughout the city- both public and 
private. 

3. Assistance to identify lead pipes within buildings and homes. 

Distribution of Bottled Water: 

At this point, we are directing all offers for donations to the Food Bank of Eastern Michigan. It is 
imperative that water be accessible to all members of the community through a variety of distribution 
channels. These channels are explained in the Logistics Section of this plan. 

Distribution of Test Bottles: 

Water testing kits can be picked up at City Hall with instructions. Test results are posted on the City's 
website to raise public awareness and encourage more participation. 

Long term Solutions: Capital Improvements Needs 

The distribution of filters, water, and food to counter the effects of lead are essential response efforts to 
keep people safe. However, long term solutions are required to keep people healthy, to eliminate lead 
from the public and private water distribution system distribution, and to provide affordable clean 
water. Our public infrastructure and utilities must be reliable, sustainable, and equitable in order for this 
community to rebound after this emergency. The following long term solutions must be implemented in 
order to set the City of Flint on a course for recovery. These solutions come at a heavy cost for a City 
that is currently in receivership. The City has experienced financial distress due to this Emergency, in 
addition to a two million dollar loss from switching back to DWSD. The City has diligently applied for 
Fiscally Distressed Cities, Villages, and Townships, Grant in order to supplement funding for capital 
improvement projects. It is essential that these grants be awarded in order to achieve long term 
solutions. 

1. COUPLETS Transition to a Temporary Safe Water Source until the Completion of KWA: 

This has already occurred. On October 16, 2015, Flint returned to receiving its water from DWSD 
on a 9 month agreement. This agreement will expire in June 2016, when the KWA is projected to 
be complete. The City had to pay $2 million out of its general fund to make this switch. 

2, UN PROGRESS Additional Corrosion Control added to the Water System: 


This is already occurring. In early December, 2015, Flint began to add additional corrosion 
control to the water coming in from DWSD in attempts to rebuild the protective scale inside its 
pipes. This is estimated to reduce lead levels in two to six months. 

3. Faucet Replacement: 

Replacement of Water faucets, and drinking fountains in the school system. It has been 
determined after state inspections that many sources of lead contamination in the School 
System's water were the faucets themselves. These faucets need to be replaced. 

4. Water Line Replacement: 

Water Line Replacement to reduce antiquated infrastructure and lead service lines. These lines 
must be identified, verified, and replaced. Residents who are facing financial hardships must 
have access to assistance to cover the costs of these replacements through access to grants and 
(forgivable) loans made available through State and Federal agencies. The corrosion damage to 
public and private lines that Flint River water caused is still being determined. 

• Replacement of an estimated fifteen thousand (15,000) lead service lines at an 

estimated cost of three thousand dollars ($3,000) per line. Total costs forty -five million 
dollars ($45,000,000). This project is estimated to be one of the most cost-intensive 
endeavors related to ameliorating water contaminants. 

5. Reimbursement of Critical Expenditures: 

Seeking reimbursement of two million dollar cost of returning to DWSD and forgiveness of 
Water Revolving Loan Debt from the State of Michigan. 


6. KWA Capital Improvements: The City has reconnected to Detroit temporarily until a water line 
from Port Huron is developed. The new water line known as the KWA pipeline or Karegnondi 
Water Authority is expected to bring water to the City from Lake Huron by July. The current cost 
agreement between Flint and DWSD is for nine months, therefore it is imperative that KWA be 
completed as soon as possible. Assistance relating to capital improvements to expedite this 
process will help to achieve long term goals. 


KWA Capital Improvements: 

a. Transfer Station to Dort Reservoir 

b. Raw water line to pump station #4 

c. Phosphoric acid feed system 

d. Alum Feed system 

e. Post filtration system 


Estimated Costs: 

$4,500,000 

$636,000 

$186,000 

$40,000 

$387,289 


/. SCADA Upgrades 
g. Sewer Relining 

Total 


$424,000 

$100,000 

$6,273,289 


Ancillary Considerations: Public Safety during an Emergency 

During a time of emergency public safety agencies need to be prepared to respond to threats to public 
safety and critical infrastructure. The City is facing a man-made emergency that is threatening the public 
health. Resentment and hostility toward local institutions and municipal government is at a significant 
level. 

Critical infrastructure should be safeguarded if the need arises. This includes increasing security at City 
Hall to reduce potential for public safety risks. In the case of credible threats to public infrastructure, it 
may be required to hire private security company for first line of defense. Private Security is lower cost, 
thereby making it the first option. The minimum response is acted upon first, elevating only if the need 
arises. Credible or imminent threats of damage or destruction to critical infrastructure requires an 
elevated response. Such needs may require over-time police officers to address critical situations. 
Mutual aid from surrounding communities can be requested if Flint public safety is overextended. 

Implementation: 

Community Partners 

Financial limitations of the city persist while it confronts this emergency. Many community partners 
have offered their assistance to perform various needed functions. The city is heavily reliant on the 
assistance that government agencies and nonprofit organizations have provided. 

The Mott Foundation 

The Mott Foundation has provided financial assistance, especially in their generous contribution of $4 
million. In addition, the Mott Foundation has recently pledged an additional 

United Way 

The Genesee County United Way has provided significant financial assistance in the way of purchasing 
and helping to distribute water filters since the public health emergency began on October 1 st , 2015. 

Genesee County Community Action Resources Department (GCCARD) 


11 


GCCARD is organized to fight poverty and has been a primary partner in the distribution of water filters. 
It has also regularly supported the city with the logistics and availability of water filters at City Hall. 

Genesee County Health Department 

Has provided educational information to Flint Water customers 

Genesee County Board of Commissioners 

The Board of Commissioners have pledged their support to help Flint seek solutions to this crisis. The 
Board has already assisted in making health and nutrition information available to the public. 

Assistance from Wayne State University 

Wayne State University's Center for Urban Studies will be providing technical GIS support to assist in the 
documentation of emergency relief efforts. 

The US Environmental Protection Agency 

Region 5 EPA has offered assistance with Public Information distribution during the emergency. 

Outside Help is still needed... 

The City of Flint is forever thankful to our community partners who have given so much to help so many 
people. However the magnitude of this emergency calls for more resources that are beyond the capacity 
of the combined local organizations and government agencies. Long term solutions will require a heavy 
investment in health care and capital improvement projects to upgrade the city's antiquated water 
distribution system. 

• Help with Immediate Relief in terms of assuring allocative efficiency. Distribution should 
be equitable- assistance from other governments required to assure this. 

• Reaching communities for the distribution of water filters, water, and educational 
materials. 

• Help with Water Testing to increase participation and lead education. 

• Increasing the rate of water testing 

• Assistance is required to fund essential capital improvement projects to guarantee clean 
and safe water. 


12 


From: Creagh, Keith (DNR) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 8:15 PM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Kelenske, Chris 

(MSP); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Becker, 
Timothy (DHHS); Roberts, John (DTMB); Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 
Subject: Re: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 


Thanks for the opportunity to comment. I agree with Jim that it would be good to have a local entity at least be a co vice 
chair if possible. I would question statement of need wording and ask that it be reflect of the need for additional 
resources, integrated approach, additional professional expertise, enhanced communication, coordination and 
connection. ..you get the gist. Rich I would be happy to discuss at your convenience if appropriate. This would appear 
consistent with the request from Flint. Also in my limited (and I stress limited) discussions today I asked what success 
looked like and it included many of the suggested components. The individual I was speaking with wanted to further 
explore: 

Increased funding/focus for Head start to get ahead of the curve 
School nutrition and distribution systems (year around) 

Fresh produce/local foods 

Individual health screening 
Infrastructure improvements 

I know most if not all are identified in the outline but might want to further explain the nutrition component if the Docs 
in the group say it might be beneficial for those involved. 

Thanks again-Keith 


Sent from my iPad 


On Dec 30, 2015, at 6:57 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) < b a j r d r .mi c h a n r s? o v > wrote: 

Team: 

Today Harvey and I met with the Flint Water Task Force. It was a good meeting. People were pleased 
with the G's statement from the prior day. Captain Kelenske joined us and we had a very good 
discussion about moving forward with the creation of the Flint Water Crisis Agency Coordinating 
Committee (FIACC). Tim Becker and Captain Kelenske provided me with a fair amount of input. I also 
read the City of Flint Incident Action Plan for a State of Emergency which Chris received today (enclosed 
for those who wish to read it as well). I have distilled all of this into a two page plan that I want your 
edits and comments on and a one page organizational chart (now presented in the "governor's colors" 
according to our fine people in Communications). Spoiler alert— I made Captain Kelenske Vice Chair of 
the whole shebang (with the Colonel's blessing) so Harvey wouldn't get lonely. 

Here is my ask of you: 

1) Within 24 (sooner if you can) hours give me your comments and input 

2) Tomorrow I will turn around a final document for Jarrod to review with the Governor either 
New Year's Day or Saturday 

3) Ideally, Governor will approve Harvey sending it to Mayor Weaver Saturday (Sunday latest) 


l 



4) Mayor needs to know that this is what the Governor wishes to discuss at the meeting January 7 
along with financial resources that we still need some estimates on cost from DHHS for 

5) Meegan and Dave need to noodle how best to get out front with this and change the narrative 
focus on Monday's Genesee County declaration of emergency 


I know we are all working way too hard for what should be a rest and recharge period but I do 
appreciate everyone's efforts and I know the Boss really does as well. 

Regards, 

Rich 

<A Proposal to Create the Flint Water Inter.docx> 

<IA Coord Com Org Chart.jpg> 

<IAP Flint Water 2015-12-29.pdf> 


2 



From: Kelenske, Chris (MSP) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 8:38 PM 

To: Creagh, Keith (DNR); Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Holland, 

Meegan (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Becker, Timothy (DHHS); 
Roberts, John (DTMB); Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 

Subject: RE: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 


The concern I have with having a local as a vice chair is that this is being pushed to the state level to fix. Similar to an 
emergency that reaches the state level, we need to have one lead to move this forward and that should be at the state 
level. I have run numerous state and federal disasters in this manner. The locals are pushing the request for resources 
to the state so this is them saying they cannot do anything more and handing this off to the state. This is one of the 
areas i mentioned that needs to stay consistent with the Emergency Management Act and how we manage incidents. 


Locals still have a voice in this (one way is that they are generating the requests for resources to assist). 


Chris 


From: Creagh, Keith (DNR) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 8:15 PM 
To: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Kelenske, Chris (MSP); Holland, Meegan 
(GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Becker, Timothy (DHHS); Roberts, John (DTMB); Etue, Kriste 
(MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 

Subject: Re: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 

Thanks for the opportunity to comment. I agree with Jim that it would be good to have a local entity at least be a co vice 
chair if possible. I would question statement of need wording and ask that it be reflect of the need for additional 
resources, integrated approach, additional professional expertise, enhanced communication, coordination and 
connection. ..you get the gist. Rich I would be happy to discuss at your convenience if appropriate. This would appear 
consistent with the request from Flint. Also in my limited (and I stress limited) discussions today I asked what success 
looked like and it included many of the suggested components. The individual I was speaking with wanted to further 
explore: 

Increased funding/focus for Head start to get ahead of the curve 
School nutrition and distribution systems (year around) 

Fresh produce/local foods 

Individual health screening 
Infrastructure improvements 

I know most if not all are identified in the outline but might want to further explain the nutrition component if the Docs 
in the group say it might be beneficial for those involved. 

Thanks again-Keith 


Sent from my iPad 


l 



On Dec 30, 2015, at 6:57 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) < bai?drff i rriichlgan.gov > wrote: 


Team: 

Today Harvey and I met with the Flint Water Task Force. It was a good meeting. People were pleased 
with the G's statement from the prior day. Captain Kelenske joined us and we had a very good 
discussion about moving forward with the creation of the Flint Water Crisis Agency Coordinating 
Committee (FIACC). Tim Becker and Captain Kelenske provided me with a fair amount of input. I also 
read the City of Flint Incident Action Plan for a State of Emergency which Chris received today (enclosed 
for those who wish to read it as well). I have distilled all of this into a two page plan that I want your 
edits and comments on and a one page organizational chart (now presented in the "governor's colors" 
according to our fine people in Communications). Spoiler alert— I made Captain Kelenske Vice Chair of 
the whole shebang (with the Colonel's blessing) so Harvey wouldn't get lonely. 

Here is my ask of you: 

1) Within 24 (sooner if you can) hours give me your comments and input 

2) Tomorrow I will turn around a final document for Jarrod to review with the Governor either 
New Year's Day or Saturday 

3) Ideally, Governor will approve Harvey sending it to Mayor Weaver Saturday (Sunday latest) 

4) Mayor needs to know that this is what the Governor wishes to discuss at the meeting January 7 
along with financial resources that we still need some estimates on cost from DHHS for 

5) Meegan and Dave need to noodle how best to get out front with this and change the narrative 
focus on Monday's Genesee County declaration of emergency 


I know we are all working way too hard for what should be a rest and recharge period but I do 
appreciate everyone's efforts and I know the Boss really does as well. 

Regards, 

Rich 

<A Proposal to Create the Flint Water Inter.docx> 

<IA Coord Com Org Chart.jpg> 

<IAP Flint Water 2015-12-29.pdf> 


2 



From: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 8:51 PM 

To: Kelenske, Chris (MSP) 

Cc: Creagh, Keith (DNR); Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); 

Holland, Meegan (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Becker, Timothy 
(DHHS); Roberts, John (DTMB); Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 

Subject: Re: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 

I agree with Chris. This structure has worked very well with state/federal disasters we have managed over the last few 
years. 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Dec 30, 2015, at 8:38 PM, Kelenske, Chris (MSP) <KetenskeC@michtg3n.gov> wrote: 

The concern I have with having a local as a vice chair is that this is being pushed to the state level to 
fix. Similar to an emergency that reaches the state level, we need to have one lead to move this forward 
and that should be at the state level. I have run numerous state and federal disasters in this 
manner. The locals are pushing the request for resources to the state so this is them saying they cannot 
do anything more and handing this off to the state. This is one of the areas I mentioned that needs to 
stay consistent with the Emergency Management Act and how we manage incidents. 

Locals still have a voice in this (one way is that they are generating the requests for resources to assist). 

Chris 


From: Creagh, Keith (DNR) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 8:15 PM 
To: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Kelenske, Chris (MSP); 
Holland, Meegan (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Becker, Timothy (DHHS); Roberts, 
John (DTMB); Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 

Subject: Re: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 

Thanks for the opportunity to comment. I agree with Jim that it would be good to have a local entity at 
least be a co vice chair if possible. I would question statement of need wording and ask that it be reflect 
of the need for additional resources, integrated approach, additional professional expertise, enhanced 
communication, coordination and connection. ..you get the gist. Rich I would be happy to discuss at your 
convenience if appropriate. This would appear consistent with the request from Flint. Also in my limited 
(and I stress limited) discussions today I asked what success looked like and it included many of the 
suggested components. The individual I was speaking with wanted to further explore: 

Increased funding/focus for Head start to get ahead of the curve 
School nutrition and distribution systems (year around) 

Fresh produce/local foods 

Individual health screening 
Infrastructure improvements 

l 



I know most if not all are identified in the outline but might want to further explain the nutrition 
component if the Docs in the group say it might be beneficial for those involved. 

Thanks again-Keith 


Sent from my iPad 

On Dec 30, 2015, at 6:57 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) < hairdrffirnidiigan,gov > wrote: 

Team: 

Today Harvey and I met with the Flint Water Task Force. It was a good meeting. People 
were pleased with the G's statement from the prior day. Captain Kelenske joined us and 
we had a very good discussion about moving forward with the creation of the Flint 
Water Crisis Agency Coordinating Committee (FIACC). Tim Becker and Captain Kelenske 
provided me with a fair amount of input. I also read the City of Flint Incident Action Plan 
for a State of Emergency which Chris received today (enclosed for those who wish to 
read it as well). I have distilled all of this into a two page plan that I want your edits and 
comments on and a one page organizational chart (now presented in the "governor's 
colors" according to our fine people in Communications). Spoiler alert— I made Captain 
Kelenske Vice Chair of the whole shebang (with the Colonel's blessing) so Harvey 
wouldn't get lonely. 

Here is my ask of you: 

1) Within 24 (sooner if you can) hours give me your comments and input 

2) Tomorrow I will turn around a final document for Jarrod to review with the 
Governor either New Year's Day or Saturday 

3) Ideally, Governor will approve Harvey sending it to Mayor Weaver Saturday 
(Sunday latest) 

4) Mayor needs to know that this is what the Governor wishes to discuss at the 
meeting January 7 along with financial resources that we still need some 
estimates on cost from DHHS for 

5) Meegan and Dave need to noodle how best to get out front with this and 
change the narrative focus on Monday's Genesee County declaration of 
emergency 


I know we are all working way too hard for what should be a rest and recharge period 
but I do appreciate everyone's efforts and I know the Boss really does as well. 

Regards, 

Rich 

<A Proposal to Create the Flint Water Inter. docx> 

<IA Coord Com Org Chart.jpg> 

<IAP Flint Water 2015-12-29.pdF> 


2 



From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 8:51 PM 

To: Creagh, Keith (DNR) 

Cc: Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Kelenske, Chris 

(MSP); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Becker, 
Timothy (DHHS); Roberts, John (DTMB); Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 
Subject: Re: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 


I agree with Jim's observations well. We need both a city and county representative to serve. We'll have to work on the 
city piece because other than the Mayor or , Brian Larkin, there's not one person I'd recommend. 

Best, 

Harvey 

On Dec 30, 2015, at 8:15 PM, Creagh, Keith (DNR) <cre3ghk@nHchigan.gov> wrote: 

Thanks for the opportunity to comment. I agree with Jim that it would be good to have a local entity at 
least be a co vice chair if possible. I would question statement of need wording and ask that it be reflect 
of the need for additional resources, integrated approach, additional professional expertise, enhanced 
communication, coordination and connection. ..you get the gist. Rich I would be happy to discuss at your 
convenience if appropriate. This would appear consistent with the request from Flint. Also in my limited 
(and I stress limited) discussions today I asked what success looked like and it included many of the 
suggested components. The individual I was speaking with wanted to further explore: 

Increased funding/focus for Head start to get ahead of the curve 
School nutrition and distribution systems (year around) 

Fresh produce/local foods 

Individual health screening 
Infrastructure improvements 

I know most if not all are identified in the outline but might want to further explain the nutrition 
component if the Docs in the group say it might be beneficial for those involved. 

Thanks again-Keith 


Sent from my iPad 


On Dec 30, 2015, at 6:57 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) < ba i rdr@ m j ch iga n .gov > wrote: 

Team: 

Today Harvey and I met with the Flint Water Task Force. It was a good meeting. People 
were pleased with the G's statement from the prior day. Captain Kelenske joined us and 
we had a very good discussion about moving forward with the creation of the Flint 
Water Crisis Agency Coordinating Committee (FIACC). Tim Becker and Captain Kelenske 
provided me with a fair amount of input. I also read the City of Flint Incident Action Plan 
for a State of Emergency which Chris received today (enclosed for those who wish to 


l 



read it as well). I have distilled all of this into a two page plan that I want your edits and 
comments on and a one page organizational chart (now presented in the "governor's 
colors" according to our fine people in Communications). Spoiler alert— I made Captain 
Kelenske Vice Chair of the whole shebang (with the Colonel's blessing) so Harvey 
wouldn't get lonely. 

Here is my ask of you: 

1) Within 24 (sooner if you can) hours give me your comments and input 

2) Tomorrow I will turn around a final document for Jarrod to review with the 
Governor either New Year's Day or Saturday 

3) Ideally, Governor will approve Harvey sending it to Mayor Weaver Saturday 
(Sunday latest) 

4) Mayor needs to know that this is what the Governor wishes to discuss at the 
meeting January 7 along with financial resources that we still need some 
estimates on cost from DHHS for 

5) Meegan and Dave need to noodle how best to get out front with this and 
change the narrative focus on Monday's Genesee County declaration of 
emergency 


I know we are all working way too hard for what should be a rest and recharge period 
but I do appreciate everyone's efforts and I know the Boss really does as well. 

Regards, 

Rich 

<A Proposal to Create the Flint Water Inter.docx> 

<IA Coord Com Org Chart.jpg> 

<IAP Flint Water 20 1 5- 1 2-29.pdf^ 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Wednesday, December 30, 2015 9:01 PM 

Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV); Kelenske, Chris (MSP); Murray, David (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Becker, 
Timothy (DHHS); Creagh, Keith (DNR); Roberts, John (DTMB) 

Cc: Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 

Subject: RE: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 


I offer a few thoughts, and some of these may be incredibly naive, but we seem to be in a brainstorming 
mode: 


■ Should we include MSHDA in the mix of departments involved in this? They administer the Community 

Development Block Grant program and this may call for some of that money. 

■ It might be prudent to reach out to Sen. Ananich, Rep. Neeley and U.S. Rep. Dan Kildee to see if they 

would like representatives from their offices on any of these committees. 

■ We still need to convey better the extent of the problem. So maybe this is a communications issue more 

than anything else, because I do know testing is going on. I don't know HOW it's going on, so I offer 
these suggestions, realizing they may already be happening or are totally unrealistic: 

The goal: Assess the extent of the elevated blood lead levels - the number of those affected and the degree to 
which they're affected 

■ Get as many people in the affected zip codes tested as possible - can the Red Cross or some other 

agency with a bus or mobile unit set up for folks to give blood convert over to blood level testing and 
go into neighborhoods that have low testing rates? 

■ A public health friend of mine said that Genesee County Health workers are stressed to the max. Can 

we deploy appropriate personnel from other county health agencies to help with inspecting homes for 
possible other causes? In other words, it won't do any good to invest more in water infrastructure if 
we're finding window sills with teeth marks. I say this NOT to downplay the role that water lead levels 
may have played. But can we get Habitat for Humanity, for example, to do a massive volunteer effort 
to eradicate lead paint in homes ... or is that beyond their expertise? 

■ Gather experts to assess exactly how extensive the problem is and potential causes. And then convey 

this in a much more accessible ways. If you want blood level data, you have to scroll down on the DHHS 
web site, find the headline and then read a long press release. Maybe we're conveying this information 
better on the ground, but if not, we need to communicate conclusive findings in multiple ways- 
graphics, video, informational photo galleries and maybe even a "test" that residents can take to see if 
their home is at risk in other ways. I know that sounds awfully MLive-ish, but it can be effective. 


From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 6:57 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <A g enJ @ m;chig3n. go v>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <eiejmenf e @reiehi ga n.gov>; Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) <hoHinsh@rnichi gan.gov >; Kelenske, Chris (MSP) < KeienskeC@miclTigari.gov >; Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

<HoilandM2@rnic.higan. go v>; Murray, David (GOV) <Murr3yDl@mlchigan.gov>; Redford, James (GOV) 
<RedfordJ@michlgan. g oy>; Becker, Timothy (DHHS) <beckertl@mlchi g an.gov>; Creagh, Keith (DNR) 
<ereaghk@ mi ch igan.gQ¥ >; Roberts, John (DTMB) <Robertsj9@rnjchigan.gov> 

Cc: Etue, Kriste (MSP) <FtueK@roiehigan. go v>; Lyon, Nick (DHHS) < tyo n N ■?. ipj m i c h iga n .go v> 

Subject: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 


l 



Team: 


Today Harvey and I met with the Flint Water Task Force. It was a good meeting. People were pleased with the G's 
statement from the prior day. Captain Kelenske joined us and we had a very good discussion about moving forward with 
the creation of the Flint Water Crisis Agency Coordinating Committee (FIACC). Tim Becker and Captain Kelenske 
provided me with a fair amount of input. I also read the City of Flint Incident Action Plan for a State of Emergency which 
Chris received today (enclosed for those who wish to read it as well). I have distilled all of this into a two page plan that I 
want your edits and comments on and a one page organizational chart (now presented in the "governor's colors" 
according to our fine people in Communications). Spoiler alert— I made Captain Kelenske Vice Chair of the whole 
shebang (with the Colonel's blessing) so Harvey wouldn't get lonely. 

Here is my ask of you: 

1) Within 24 (sooner if you can) hours give me your comments and input 

2) Tomorrow I will turn around a final document for Jarrod to review with the Governor either New Year's Day or 
Saturday 

3) Ideally, Governor will approve Harvey sending it to Mayor Weaver Saturday (Sunday latest) 

4) Mayor needs to know that this is what the Governor wishes to discuss at the meeting January 7 along with 
financial resources that we still need some estimates on cost from DHHS for 

5) Meegan and Dave need to noodle how best to get out front with this and change the narrative focus on 
Monday's Genesee County declaration of emergency 

I know we are all working way too hard for what should be a rest and recharge period but I do appreciate everyone's 
efforts and I know the Boss really does as well. 

Regards, 

Rich 


2 



From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 9:02 PM 

To: Kelenske, Chris (MSP) 

Cc: Creagh, Keith (DNR); Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth 

(GOV); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Becker, 
Timothy (DHHS); Roberts, John (DTMB); Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 
Subject: Re: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 


Then they could be on the same line as the SMEs or added as a dotted horizontal line off the top. But the FWATF clearly 
suggested local involvement. 

Best, 

Harvey 

On Dec 30, 2015, at 8:38 PM, Kelenske, Chris (MSP) < KelenskeC@michigan,gov > wrote: 

The concern I have with having a local as a vice chair is that this is being pushed to the state level to 
fix. Similar to an emergency that reaches the state level, we need to have one lead to move this forward 
and that should be at the state level, i have run numerous state and federal disasters in this 
manner. The locals are pushing the request for resources to the state so this is them saying they cannot 
do anything more and handing this off to the state. This is one of the areas I mentioned that needs to 
stay consistent with the Emergency Management Act and how we manage incidents. 

Locals still have a voice in this (one way is that they are generating the requests for resources to assist). 

Chris 


From: Creagh, Keith (DNR) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 8:15 PM 
To: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Kelenske, Chris (MSP); 
Holland, Meegan (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Becker, Timothy (DHHS); Roberts, 
John (DTMB); Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 

Subject: Re: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 

Thanks for the opportunity to comment. I agree with Jim that it would be good to have a local entity at 
least be a co vice chair if possible. I would question statement of need wording and ask that it be reflect 
of the need for additional resources, integrated approach, additional professional expertise, enhanced 
communication, coordination and connection. ..you get the gist. Rich I would be happy to discuss at your 
convenience if appropriate. This would appear consistent with the request from Flint. Also in my limited 
(and I stress limited) discussions today I asked what success looked like and it included many of the 
suggested components. The individual I was speaking with wanted to further explore: 

Increased funding/focus for Head start to get ahead of the curve 
School nutrition and distribution systems (year around) 

Fresh produce/local foods 

Individual health screening 
Infrastructure improvements 

l 



I know most if not all are identified in the outline but might want to further explain the nutrition 
component if the Docs in the group say it might be beneficial for those involved. 

Thanks again-Keith 


Sent from my iPad 

On Dec 30, 2015, at 6:57 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) < hairdr(& rnidngan.gov > wrote: 

Team: 

Today Harvey and I met with the Flint Water Task Force. It was a good meeting. People 
were pleased with the G's statement from the prior day. Captain Kelenske joined us and 
we had a very good discussion about moving forward with the creation of the Flint 
Water Crisis Agency Coordinating Committee (FIACC). Tim Becker and Captain Kelenske 
provided me with a fair amount of input. I also read the City of Flint Incident Action Plan 
for a State of Emergency which Chris received today (enclosed for those who wish to 
read it as well). I have distilled all of this into a two page plan that I want your edits and 
comments on and a one page organizational chart (now presented in the "governor's 
colors" according to our fine people in Communications). Spoiler alert— I made Captain 
Kelenske Vice Chair of the whole shebang (with the Colonel's blessing) so Harvey 
wouldn't get lonely. 

Here is my ask of you: 

1) Within 24 (sooner if you can) hours give me your comments and input 

2) Tomorrow I will turn around a final document for Jarrod to review with the 
Governor either New Year's Day or Saturday 

3) Ideally, Governor will approve Harvey sending it to Mayor Weaver Saturday 
(Sunday latest) 

4) Mayor needs to know that this is what the Governor wishes to discuss at the 
meeting January 7 along with financial resources that we still need some 
estimates on cost from DHHS for 

5) Meegan and Dave need to noodle how best to get out front with this and 
change the narrative focus on Monday's Genesee County declaration of 
emergency 


I know we are all working way too hard for what should be a rest and recharge period 
but I do appreciate everyone's efforts and I know the Boss really does as well. 

Regards, 

Rich 

<A Proposal to Create the Flint Water Inter. docx> 

<IA Coord Com Org Chart.jpg> 

<IAP Flint Water 2015-12-29.pdF> 


2 



From: Becker, Timothy (DHHS) 

Sent: Wednesday, December BO, 2015 11:35 PM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey 

(GOV); Kelenske, Chris (MSP); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Redford, 
James (GOV); Creagh, Keith (DNR); Roberts, John (DTMB) 

Cc: Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 

Subject: RE: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 

Attachments: FY16 and FY17 Flint supplemental.xls 


Attached is a supplemental MDHHS advanced to SBO today (John: Farah sent to Nancy, Harkins, and team). This 
addresses surveillance, case management, and lead abatement in homes including pipes. St does not yet establish the 
long- term "health fund" some have advocated for. On the proposal document ! concur with Director Creagh's and Mr. 
Radford's suggestions on a slight re -wording of statement of need. I am comfortable with the general framework of the 
group. I agree with Captain Kelenske that the state needs to lead the group. ! think with the Executive and MSP chairing 
the state is providing the requested prospective leadership. We have built in extensive participation from city, county, 
and subject matter experts and we wii! be compieteiy transparent with ail partners. 


From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 6:57 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigan..s;ov >; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) < cjemente@mjchigan.gov >; Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) < hoHinsh@michigan.gov >; Kelenske, Chris (MSP) < RelenskeC@michig3n.gov >; Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

< Holjan d M 2 @ m 1 c h i g a n . g o v > ; Murray, David (GOV) < M u era y D 1 @ m I c h i g a n . g o v > ; Redford, James (GOV) 

< Red ford J @ m i ch i ga n ,g o v > ; Becker, Timothy (DHHS) < beckertl@ryi.chigan.gov >; Creagh, Keith (DNR) 
< creaghk@michig3n.gov >; Roberts, John (DTMB) < Robertsj9@m;chigan.gov > 

Cc: Etue, Kriste (MSP) < FtueK@michigan.gov >; Lyon, Nick (DHHS) < Lyon N 2 @ m i chjgan -go v > 

Subject: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 


Team: 


Today Harvey and I met with the Flint Water Task Force. It was a good meeting. People were pleased with the G's 
statement from the prior day. Captain Kelenske joined us and we had a very good discussion about moving forward with 
the creation of the Flint Water Crisis Agency Coordinating Committee (FIACC). Tim Becker and Captain Kelenske 
provided me with a fair amount of input. I also read the City of Flint Incident Action Plan for a State of Emergency which 
Chris received today (enclosed for those who wish to read it as well). I have distilled all of this into a two page plan that I 
want your edits and comments on and a one page organizational chart (now presented in the "governor's colors" 
according to our fine people in Communications). Spoiler alert— I made Captain Kelenske Vice Chair of the whole 
shebang (with the Colonel's blessing) so Harvey wouldn't get lonely. 

Here is my ask of you: 

1) Within 24 (sooner if you can) hours give me your comments and input 

2) Tomorrow I will turn around a final document for Jarrod to review with the Governor either New Year's Day or 
Saturday 

3) Ideally, Governor will approve Harvey sending it to Mayor Weaver Saturday (Sunday latest) 

4) Mayor needs to know that this is what the Governor wishes to discuss at the meeting January 7 along with 
financial resources that we still need some estimates on cost from DHHS for 

5) Meegan and Dave need to noodle how best to get out front with this and change the narrative focus on 
Monday's Genesee County declaration of emergency 


l 



I know we are all working way too hard for what should be a rest and recharge period but I do appreciate everyone's 
efforts and I know the Boss really does as well. 

Regards, 

Rich 


2 



From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, December 31 , 201 5 3:37 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Cc: Baird, Richard (GOV); Kelenske, Chris (MSP); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Creagh, Keith 

(DNR); Lyon, Nick (DHHS); Redford, James (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Scott, Allison 
(GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: Draft Documents Subject to Attorney Client Privilege (FIAAC) 

Attachments: A Proposal to Create the Flint Water Inter [225139].docx; IA Coord Com Org Chart 

[233264], pptx; FY16 and FY17 Flint supplemental (233203).xls 


Team: 

I have received all of the input provided and thank you. The following highlights: 

■ The only two "enterprise wide" folks we have as Coordinators are Harvey Hollins and Chris Kalenske. I have 

changed their titles to reflect a coordination/facilitation role and not connote "We are in charge and to hell with 
everyone else". Therefore I have changed the org chart and created a "dotted line" depiction— and also added 
the Legislative body as they (or subsets) may have a role here as well. 

■ But make no mistake, we are going to be accountable whether we should be or not so we are not syndicated the 

leadership that comes with the coordinating roles. I rewrote certain pieces of the proposal to reflect our 
inclusion, equality and partnership. But make no mistake, Harvey and Chris are the guys who will make this 
coordination effort work and if either of them encounter resistance with any of our partners in this effort, I have 
pledged to have their backs using my persuasive charm and bankruptcy tested mediation skills... 

■ I did not bring in more departments at this time. That is not to say they would not be value add, but there is a 

difference between an emergency response and planning effort, and introducing some other ways to get help 
and support to Flint. We will do that too, but not at this time. 

■ I have attached Tim Becker's Supplemental Request. Note that even at $6 million over 2 years it does not include 

funding for the sort of long term monitoring of consequences of lead impact. 

■ Lastly I want people to know that we are committed to a spirit of inclusion, even with those who have been 

relentless in their attacks without offering any insights to solutionality. But some of these people have a 
stronger interest in advancing their own personal agenda and not devoting any real efforts to solving real 
problems. They will only be welcome if they decide to pursue the latter behavior vs. the former. 

Unless someone thinks I really botched something up in the proposal, I would now ask Jarrod to give it final blessing and 
share with the Governor to get confirmation on the way forward. 

Thanks everyone for a less than 24 hour turnaround and... 

Go Green 

Ok ok.. .Go Blue too... 

HNY, 

Rich 


l 



Sent from Mail for Windows 10 



A Proposal to Create the Flint Water Inter-Agency Coordinating Committee 

(FIACC) 


In collaboration with the Flint After-Action Task Force, MSP Captain Chris Kelenske, DHHS Chief Deputy 
Tim Becker and DH FHS Director Nick Lyon, Harvey Hollins and Rich Baird are recommending the 
immediate creation of the above referenced entity, with its sustained role and responsibility enabled 
under the Governor's Executive Order. 

Statement of Need 

Due to a combination of resource constraints, inexperienced personnel, "silo" bureaucratic processes 
and the need to react to immediate problems, there is a lack of coordination, communication, and 
connected management amongst the departments and stakeholders who must work together to ensure 
Flint's return to clean, safe water and to coordinate mid and long term efforts to mitigate and address 
future health and behavioral consequences from lead ingestion. This group MUST be stood up 
regardless of whether (or when) the conditions required for a declaration of emergency are met by the 
City, County, State or Federal authorizers. 

This inter agency group must fully engage with those we seek to serve. Equal partners. Equal 
leadership. Equal responsibility. Equal chance to be part of the solution to an important and not fully 
understood problem. We need our fellow citizens to be our partners in finding a solution, to feel they 
and their city and community leaders are not just part of the solution but are leading the solution with 
partners they can trust. This entity needs to be coordinated by State of Michigan leaders who represent 
statewide resources and constituencies and the citizens who comprise them. This coordinating body 
must include: 

• The creation of a routine information process between all parties. 

• Pursuit of other avenues of funding including federal grants and legislative appropriations. 

• While the Emergency Management Act or the Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act 
may be mechanisms to fix the issues in Flint, portions of the Emergency Management Act outlining 
management of events are applicable and should be implemented without delay (e.g. Local 
emergency operations plans/emergency operations guides as well as emergency operations support 
plans). 

Action Plan and Establishing the FIACCC 

It appears that a request for a Governor's declaration may be coming from Genesee County as quickly as 
January 4, 2016. The state's Emergency Coordinator (Capt. Kelenske) will evaluate the request and 
provide a recommendation whether to issue a declaration, following established protocol and due 
diligence. But immediately, we will: 


1 . Establish an interagency workgroup coordinated by Harvey Hollins and Chris Kelenske (who will be 
actively supported in their work by Rich Baird), and be comprised of DHHS, MDEQ, MSP, Treasury, 
Genesee County, City of Flint, MDE, LARA and external Subject Matter Experts (SMEs). Civil Rights 
and MSHDA may be added at a later time. If additional agencies/stakeholders who can assist with 
accomplishing the action plan are needed, they will be added. Personnel must be goal oriented, 
transparent with findings and measures of progress, and able to work toward accomplishing the 
Incident Action Plan created by the state in a timely manner. This is not a discussion or policy group. 
It is an active problem solving, execution oriented group of professionals of equal stature 
completely dedicated to the Flint solution and remediation, and enabled by the statewide 
capabilities of the coordinators. Staff will be needed with competencies in disaster/emergency 




planning, operations, logistics and finance as outlined under the National Incident Management 
System (NIMS). These management components are accountable to the coordinating leadership to 
ensure tracking of resource requests, and incident action plan items are created, documented and 
completed. A draft Organization Chart is attached under separate cover and the "dotted lines" 
depict a non-hierarchical structure where the members commit to working, communicating and 
sharing collectively vs departmentally. 

2. This body should be created by Executive Order and it must complement and not replace the 
current system under the Emergency Management Act. In fact, it should demonstrate how to best 
leverage support where existing laws fall short under a man-made emergency. 

3. Utilize the National Incident Management System and Unified/Incident Command as appropriate. 

4. Establish routine communications protocols at the operational, executive, and legislative levels as 
determined appropriate. 

5. Establish interagency workgroup objectives using the following as a starting point. 

Interagency Workgroup Objectives 

1 . Determine and convey acceptable standards for potable water. 

■ Identify needed remediation. 

■ Convey the remediation plan objectives to all stakeholders and interested parties. 

■ Logistics plan for distribution and serving homebound citizens with water and 
filtration 

■ Implement the plan. 

2. Determine health impacts for the impacted population. 

■ Identify treatment methods. 

■ Nutrition education and support 

■ Coping with lead exposure (care, monitoring, neurodevelopmental screening, access 
to DBP specialists, psychologists/psychiatrists, expanded county services, etc.) 

■ Convey the treatment plan objectives to interested parties. 

■ Implement the plan. 

3. Establish a public information protocol to effectively inform the community of the situation 
and actions taken. 

■ Identify existing Public Information outlets within the city, county, and state. 

■ Establish a Joint Information Center 

■ Provide for Emergency Alerts and Updates 

■ Leverage public and private education schools 

■ Determine official information flow and approval of information. 

■ Convey to interested parties. 

4. Assess the status of the infrastructure and determine feasible actions to upgrade the water 
system. 

■ Determine current state of the infrastructure. 

■ Develop priorities, costs, and potential funding sources for infrastructure upgrades 
as part of a long term recovery plan. 

■ Seek partners to assist (NGOs, Foundations, Business, etc.) 

■ Implement the plan. 


Next Steps 



1. Input to this plan has been received and incorporated where feasible. Chief of Staff Jarrod Agen 
gives final draft approval and reviews with Governor Snyder as soon as possible but not later 
than Saturday, January 2, 2016 

2. Governor Snyder reviews approves/adjusts and decides on the plan and authorizes Harvey 
Hollins to provide the plan to Mayor Karen Weaver on Saturday or Sunday, January 3, 2016. 

3. As a courtesy, I would like to share the plan with the Flint WAATF after it has been provided to 
Mayor Weaver. 

4. Communications should have a strategy on when this plan gets released publically (before, 
during or after the expected Emergency Declaration by Genesee County. If there is no 
declaration, we should proactively communicate (and perhaps share the communication with 
the TF). 

5. We are not contemplating activating the State Emergency Operations Center (SEOC) until AFTER 
Genesee County has demonstrated they did all they conceivably could have done, utilized all 
available resources to include contracts and mutual aid, and couldn't solve the problem. That is 
what is required under the Emergency Management Act. 

6. MDHHS has put forth a supplemental budget request for FY 16 and 17 for testing, outreach, 
education, etc. It does not contemplate behavioral or cognitive remediation in the event of lead 
poisoning. 






From: 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: 

Friday, January 01, 2016 9:30 AM 

To: 

Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: 

Kelenske, Chris (MSP); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Creagh, Keith (DNR); Lyon, Nick 
(DHHS); Redford, James (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV); Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Draft Documents Subject to Attorney Client Privilege (FIAAC) 


Thanks all. 

I will share with the Governor today. 


On Dec 31, 2015, at 3:37 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@michigan.gov > wrote: 

Team: 

I have received all of the input provided and thank you. The following highlights: 

■ The only two "enterprise wide" folks we have as Coordinators are Harvey Hollins and Chris 

Kalenske. I have changed their titles to reflect a coordination/facilitation role and not connote 
"We are in charge and to hell with everyone else". Therefore I have changed the org chart and 
created a "dotted line" depiction— and also added the Legislative body as they (or subsets) may 
have a role here as well. 

■ But make no mistake, we are going to be accountable whether we should be or not so we are not 

syndicated the leadership that comes with the coordinating roles. I rewrote certain pieces of 
the proposal to reflect our inclusion, equality and partnership. But make no mistake, Harvey 
and Chris are the guys who will make this coordination effort work and if either of them 
encounter resistance with any of our partners in this effort, I have pledged to have their backs 
using my persuasive charm and bankruptcy tested mediation skills... 

■ I did not bring in more departments at this time. That is not to say they would not be value add, 

but there is a difference between an emergency response and planning effort, and introducing 
some other ways to get help and support to Flint. We will do that too, but not at this time. 

■ I have attached Tim Becker's Supplemental Request. Note that even at $6 million over 2 years it 

does not include funding for the sort of long term monitoring of consequences of lead impact. 

■ Lastly I want people to know that we are committed to a spirit of inclusion, even with those who 

have been relentless in their attacks without offering any insights to solutionality. But some of 
these people have a stronger interest in advancing their own personal agenda and not devoting 
any real efforts to solving real problems. They will only be welcome if they decide to pursue the 
latter behavior vs. the former. 

Unless someone thinks I really botched something up in the proposal, I would now ask Jarrod to give it 
final blessing and share with the Governor to get confirmation on the way forward. 


l 



Thanks everyone for a less than 24 hour turnaround and... 


Go Green 

Ok ok.. .Go Blue too... 
HNY, 

Rich 


Sent from Mail for Windows 10 


<A Proposal to Create the Flint Water Inter [225139].docx> 
<IA Coord Com Org Chart [233264].pptx> 

<FY16 and FY17 Flint supplemental (233203). xls> 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 


Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Tuesday, January 05, 2016 1:07 PM 

Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Murray, David 
(GOV); Redford, James (GOV) 

Subject: Flint Talking Point 


All, 

Do we have a talking point for the US AG’s investigation; 


http:/7wvvw.cjetroitnews.com/story/news/mjchigan/201 


6/01 /05/fNnt-water -p robe/7S3071 42/ 


Harvey 


l 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 


Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Tuesday, January 05, 2016 1:15 PM 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Murray, David 
(GOV); Redford, James (GOV) 

Subject: RE: Flint Talking Point 


I will leave that one to Dave M. but at 9:05 am this morning, Gina left me a voicemail that i played for Comms giving us a 
heads up that they had confirmed this to the Flint Journal I responded to her at 11:15 (when I first heard the vrn) and 
left a message stating: "We appreciate the US Attorney's involvement and are happy to cooperate fully. The findings of 
the Task Force established by the Governor are available as is the full cooperation and information from the governor's 
office and all relevant state departments." 

I haven't heard back. 


From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, January 05, 2016 1:07 PM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Redford, James (GOV) 
Subject: Flint Talking Point 

All, 

Do we have a talking point for the US AG’s investigation: 


p ://vvww. detroitnews. eom/stor y /new s/m k ;h i ga n/2016/01 /Q 5/t :int--water- -p robe/78307 1 42/ 


Harvey 


l 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Michigan State Police Alert Notification System <conf-1735095130@everbridge.net> 
Tuesday, January 05, 2016 4:46 PM 
Redford, James (GOV) 

S E O C Activation 


Importance: 


High 


Please click here to acknowledge receipt of this message 


The S E O C will be activated at 8 a.m. on Wednesday January 6, 2016 in response to the Flint 
water crisis and the Emergency Declaration made by Governor Snyder. An e mail was sent to all 
primary S E M C's this afternoon requesting your agency’s participation in a mandatory briefing 
which will be conducted at the S E O C at 9 a.m. on Wednesday January 6, 2016. Please coordinate 
within your agency to assure that a representative will be at this briefing. 


This message is from the Michigan State Police Alert Notification System and is For Official Use 
Only. 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Redford, James (GOV) 

Thursday, March 26, 2015 5:23 PM 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Flint water 


Two thoughts after discussions with Valarie: 

• Cost to re-connect Flint to DWS seems higher than they should be. She thinks price estimates may be inflated so 
as to continue to show it was necs to detach from DWS in first place 

• Thinks headway could be made by our DEQ director engaging in process/discussions because DSW is in need of 
a state issued permit for something they would like to/ need to be doing and DEQ could ease the process if DSW 
were to help substantially in Flint H20 issue 

I do not know whether these observations are as visionary as if proclaimed by The Oracle of Delphi herself or if there is 
no moment at all to the assessments. 

I just pass them on as observations, that if accurate , could lead to us being able to get to a good Flint solution on water 
in place until they are up and running with a new system themselves. 

Jim 

JAMES ROBERT REDFORD 
Legal Counsel 

Executive Office of the Governor 
111 South Capital Avenue 
P.O. Box 30013 
Lansing , Michigan 48909 
517.241.5630 


l 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Redford, James (GOV) 

Monday, November 16, 2015 12:04 PM 

Weber, Travis (GOV); Thomet, Ruth (GOV); Arwood, Cheri (GOV) 

Fwd: NRDC and Flint 

2015-11-16-SDWA-Notice of Intent to Sue-Flint-FINAL.PDF; ATT00001.htm 


travis please follow up as necs 
thx 


jim 

Sent from my iPad 


Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Brader, Valerie (LARA)" < oraaer 
To: "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" <WvantD@michigan.gov>, "Weber, Travis (GOV)" <WeberT7 @ michigan.gov>, 
"Redford, James (GOV)" <Redfordi@mich iga n .go v> 

Subject: FW: NRDC and Flint 


From: Gonzalez, Ariana 

Sent: Monday, November 16, 2015 9:13 AM 

To: Brader, Valerie (LARA) 

Subject: NRDC and Flint 

Hi Valerie, 

I hoped to catch you on the phone, but didn't make it through, I wanted you to hear from me that 
NRDC's litigation team is at this moment filing a notice of intent to sue among others the City of Flint, 
Governor Snyder, and Dan Wyant under the Safe Drinking Water Act. NRDC along 'with the Concerned 
Pastors for Social Action, Melissa Mays, the American Civil Liberties Union of Michigan will working 
together in the state on this issue. I can put you in touch with those working in Flint if you'd like and will 
continue to be a resource and partner on ail energy related matters. Please let me know if you have 
questions or would like more information. 

Ariana 


Energy Policy Analyst 

NATURAL RESOURCES 
DEFENSE COUNCIL 


20 N. WACKER DRIVE. SUITE 1600 
CHICAGO, IL. 60606 
T 312.651 7924 



1 


2 



November 16, 2015 


By Certified Mail, Return Receipt Requested 

City of Flint 

Attn: Mayor Karen Williams Weaver 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
may or@city offlint . co m 

Governor Rick Snyder 
P.O.Box 30013 
Lansing, MI 48909 
contactmichigan@state. mi.us 

Director Dan Wyant 

Michigan Department of Environmental 

Quality 

Constitution Hall 
525 West Allegan Street 
P.O. Box 30473 
Lansing, MI 48909-7973 
WyantD@michigan.gov 

Treasurer Nick A. Khouri 
Michigan Department of Treasury 
Richard H. Austin Building 
430 West Allegan Street 
Lansing, MI 48922 
KhouriN @michigan. gov 

RTAB Chairperson Frederick Headen 
Flint City Hall 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
HeadenF@michigan. gov 


RTAB Member Brian Larkin 
Flint City Hall 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
blarkin@flintandgenessee.org 

RTAB Member David McGhee 
Flint City Hall 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
drmcghee@skillman. org 

RTAB Member Robert McMahan 
Flint City Hall 
1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 
president@kettering. edu 

RTAB Member Beverly Walker-Griffea 

Flint City Hall 

1101 South Saginaw Street 

Flint, MI 48502 

b . walkergriffea@mcc .edu 

City Administrator Natasha Henderson 

Flint City Hall 

1101 South Saginaw Street 

Flint, MI 48502 

nhenderson@cityofflint.com 


Re: Notice of Intent to Sue Under the Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. 

§ 300j-8(b)(l)(a), for Failure to Control Lead in Drinking Water in Flint, 
Michigan, and Failure to Assist Michigan Schools with Lead Testing and 
Remediation 

We write on behalf of Concerned Pastors for Social Action, Melissa Mays, the 
American Civil Liberties Union of Michigan (ACLU of Michigan), and the Natural 



November 16, 2015 
Page 2 of 16 

Resources Defense Council (NRDC), nonprofit citizens’ organizations and individuals 
working to secure safe drinking water for the residents of Flint, Michigan. Since April 2014, 
the City of Flint and Michigan state officials have failed to monitor and control for lead in 
Flint’s drinking water, and to maintain a program to assist Michigan schools with lead 
testing and remediation, in violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. § 300f et 
seq. This letter provides notice pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 300j-8(b)(l)(a) that we intend to sue 
the City of Flint; Rick Snyder, Governor of Michigan; Dan Wyant, Director of Michigan 
Department of Environmental Quality; Nick A. Khouri, Treasurer of Michigan; Frederick 
Headen, Chairperson of the Flint Receivership Transition Advisory Board (Board); Brian 
Tarkin, David McGhee, Robert McMahan, and Beverly Walker-Griffea, Members, RTAB; 
and Natasha Henderson, Flint City Administrator, if these violations are not remedied 
within sixty days. 1 

Concerned Pastors for Social Action is an association of religious leaders from more 
than thirty churches and ministries in the Flint area that has advocated for the rights of the 
underserved for nearly fifty years. Melissa Mays is a Flint resident whose family has 
suffered from serious health problems as a result of the City’s failure to provide safe drinking 
water. The ACTU of Michigan works in courts, legislatures, and communities to preserve 
the protections that our laws guarantee to all citizens. NRDC is a national membership 
organization committed to protecting public health and the environment and to reducing 
the exposure of all communities to toxic chemicals. These groups and individuals continue 
to be harmed by the violations of the Safe Drinking Water Act by the City and Michigan 
state officials, detailed below. 

I. City and State officials have exposed and continue to expose Flint residents to 

dangerous amounts of lead in drinking water 

A. The City, Emergency Manager, and State Treasurer chose the Flint River 
as a primary drinking-water source 

In the fall of 20 1 1 , Michigan Governor Rick Snyder declared a financial emergency 
in the City of Flint and appointed an emergency manager to take control of the City’s 
operations and finances. 2 Flint Mayor Dayne Walling and the City Council were stripped of 
all authority except as specifically allowed by the Emergency Manager, and the City was 
placed in state receivership. 3 Under Michigan’s Focal Financial Stability and Choice Act, an 


1 These individuals are noticed in their official capacities. 

2 See Mich. Comp. Laws § 141.1549; Letter from Gov. Rick Snyder to Mayor Dayne Walling 
and Flint City Council (Nov. 8, 2011), http : / /www. michisan . gov/documents/freasurv/Flint- 
GovernorsDetermination-11-8-11 417435 7.pdf (attached as Ex. 1); Dawson Bell, Governor names 
Flint native as city ’s emergency financial manager, DetroitFree Press, Nov. 30, 2011, http: / / www.freep. 
com/article/201 1 1 130/NEWS06/ 1 1 1300370/Govemor-names-Flint-native-citv-s-emergencv- 
financial-manager (attached as Ex. 2). 

3 Mich. Comp. Laws § 141.1549(2). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 3 of 16 

Emergency Manager has “broad powers” to “rectify the financial emergency and to assure 
fiscal accountability of the local government.” 4 

While under control of the Emergency Manager, the City faced decisions about the 
future of its drinking-water supply. For fifty years, the City had purchased drinking water 
from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (Detroit), which sources water from 
Lake Efuron. 5 In response to rising water rates charged by Detroit, in March 2013, the City 
Council voted to join the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA), a newly formed municipal 
water supply system. The KWA was planning to build a pipeline to distribute water directly 
from Lake Huron to mid-Michigan communities, including Genesee County, where Flint is 
located. 6 The City Council’s vote did not become effective until several weeks later, after 
both the Emergency Manager and State Treasurer approved the decision. 7 

The City’s contract with Detroit was set to expire in April 2014, at least eighteen 
months before the KWA pipeline was scheduled to be completed. 8 Faced with a year-and-a- 
half gap in the City’s water supply, the Emergency Manager declined to negotiate a short- 
term contract with Detroit and decided instead to use the Flint River as a primary drinking- 
water source. 9 The City had previously explored — and rejected — the Flint River as a 
primary drinking-water source. This is because the Flint Water Treatment Plant would have 
required fifty million dollars in upgrades to treat the river water and “produce finished water 
in conformance with the current federal and state drinking water regulations.” 10 


4 Id. 

5 See Dominic Adams, Closing the valve on history: Flint cuts water flow from Detroit after nearly 50 
years , Michigan Live, Apr. 25, 2014, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2014/04/closing 

the valve on history f.html (attached as Ex. 3). 

6 Steve Carmody, Flint opting to get its future tap water from Lake Huron , Michigan Radio, Mar. 25, 
2013, http: / /michiganradio . or g/post/ flint-op tin g- get-its-future-tap-water-lake-huron#stream/ 
(attached as Ex. 4); Karegnondi Water Authority, About, http://wsvw.karegnondi.eom/#labout/c2 
0r9 (last visited Nov. 13, 2015) (attached as Ex. 5). 

7 -See Mich. Comp. Laws § 141 . 1552(l)(g), (3); Emergency Manager, Resolution to Purchase 
Capacity from Karegnondi Water Authority (adopted Mar. 29, 2013) (attached as Ex. 6); Letter 
from Andy Dillon, State Treasurer, to Edward Kurtz, Emergency Manager (Apr. 11, 2013) 
(authorizing Emergency Manager to enter into contract with KWA) (attached as Ex. 7). 

8 Sarah Schuch, KWA pipeline work continues as Flint water lead concerns rise, Michigan Live, Sept. 
25, 2015, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/09/kwa pipeline projected to be c. 
html (attached as Ex. 8); see Ron Fonger, Detroit gives notice: It’s terminating water contract covering Flint, 
Genesee County in one year, Michigan Live, Apr. 19, 2013, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index. 
ssf/2013/04/detroit gives notice its termi.html (attached as Ex. 9). 

9 Letter from Darnell Earley, Emergency Manager, to Sue McCormick, Detroit Water & Sewer 
Dep’t (Mar. 7, 2014) (explaining that the City “has actively pursued using the Flint River as a 
temporary water source” instead of accepting Detroit’s offer to provide water to the City) (attached 
as Ex. 10). 

10 Cost of Service Study (2011), Appendix 8 to Analysis of the Flint River as a Permanent Water 
Supply for the City of Flint, http://www.scribd.com/doc/64382 1 8 1 /Analvsis-of-the-Flint-River-as- 
a-Permanent-Water-Supplv-for-the-Citv-of-Flint-Julv-2011-Appendices-l-to-8 (attached as Ex. 11); 



November 16, 2015 
Page 4 of 16 


Under the Safe Drinking Water Act’s Lead and Copper Rule, Flint’s water system 
could not use the Flint River as a water source without first obtaining approval from the 
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). The Lead and Copper Rule 
required MDEQ to approve both the City’s proposed addition of a new water source (the 
Flint River) and the long-term change in water treatment (from treatment through Detroit’s 
water plant to treatment at the Flint Water Treatment Plant). 11 In April 2014, MDEQ 
approved the switch to river water. 12 The City immediately began pumping Flint River 
water through the City’s distribution pipes and into residents’ taps. 

B. Dangerous lead contamination results from the City's switch to river water 

In the twenty months following the switch in water sources, residents’ drinking water 
has been at times cloudy, discolored, and foul-smelling. 13 Residents reported that they have 
experienced hair loss, skin rashes, and vomiting after drinking the water. 14 In the summer of 
2014, the City was forced to issue several boil-water notices after tap water tested positive 
for total coliform bacteria. 15 The City’s subsequent treatment of the water to kill disease- 
carrying pathogens resulted in elevated levels of total trihalo methanes, a disinfection 
byproduct that can cause serious health problems, including an increased risk of cancer. 16 


see also Kristin Longley, Water pipeline v. Flint River: City of Flint studying its drinking water options , 
Michigan Live, Jan. 22, 2011, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2011/01/water pipelin 
e vs flint river.html (attached as Ex. 12); Dominic Adams, Flint River now an option for drinking water 
following Detroit’s termination of contract, Michigan Live, July 23, 2013, http://www.mlive.com/news 
/flint/index.ssf/2013/07/citv readying water plant to t.html (quoting city officials’ explanation 
for rejecting use of Flint River: “upgrades to Flint’s water plant would be too expensive, the river 
didn’t provide enough capacity to serve Flint residents’ water needs and the Michigan Department 
of Environmental Quality would not allow it”) (attached as Ex. 13). 

11 40 C.F.R. § 141.90(a)(3); see also id. § 141.81(a)-(b). 

12 See Adams, Closing the valve on history, supra note 5 (Ex. 3). 

13 See Curt Guyette, In Flint, Michigan, Overpriced Water is Causing People’s Skin to Erupt in Rashes 
and Hair to Fall Out, The Nation, July 16, 2015, http://www.thenation.com/article/in-flint- 
michigan-overpriced-water-is-causing-peoples-skin-to-erupt-and-hair-to-fall-out/ (attached as Ex. 

14); Wenonah Hauter, Flint’s Brown Water Blues, Huffington Post, July 10, 2015, http: //www.huffin 
gtonpost.com/wenonah-hauter/flints-brown-water-blues b 7765132.html (attached as Ex. 15). 

14 Laura Gottesdiener, Flint, Mich., residents find state water control hard to swallow, A1 Jazeera 
America, Apr. 3, 2015, http://america. aliazeera.com/ar tides/2015/4/3/flint-residents-find-state- 
water-contr ol-har d-to-swallo w . html (attached as Ex. 16). 

15 Ron Fonger, Flint issues boil water advisory for section of the city after positive test result for total 
coliform bacteria, Michigan Live, Sept. 5, 2014, http://www.mlive.eom/news/flint/index.ssf/2014/0 
9 /flint issues boil water adviso.html (attached as Ex. 17). 

16 Robin Erb, Who wants to drink Flint’s water?, Detroit Free Press, Jan. 23, 2015, http:/ /www.free 
p.com/storv/news/local/michigan/20 15/01 /22/water-woes-latest-hit-flint/22 19329 1 / (attached as 
Ex. 18); Mich. Dep’t ofEnvtl. Quality, Violation Notice — Maximum Contaminant Level for Total 
Trihalomethanes (Dec. 16, 2014) (attached as Ex. 19); U.S. EPA, Basic Information about 
Disinfection Byproducts in Drinking Water, http://water.epa.gov/dilnk/contaminants/basicinform 




November 16, 2015 
Page 5 of 16 


Because Flint River water is also highly corrosive, dangerous amounts of lead began 
to leach out of pipes and into the City’s drinking water. 17 Lead in drinking water occurs 
primarily from corrosion of pipes and other plumbing materials that contain lead or lead 
solder. 18 The Lead and Copper Rule requires water systems to manage lead levels by 
controlling corrosion, which is often accomplished by adding corrosion-inhibiting 
chemicals. 19 Water systems must implement and maintain an “optimal” corrosion-control 
treatment program that “minimizes the lead . . . concentrations at users’ taps.” 20 

Flint did not consider how to control the corrosivity of the river water before 
switching water sources, nor did MDEQ require the City to implement any corrosion- 
control measures. Rather, beginning in April 2014, the City did not use any form of 
treatment to control corrosion. 21 The City waited until after its residents were drinking the 
river water to assess whether it posed a risk of increased lead exposure. MDEQ endorsed 
this approach. In June 2014, Flint’s water system initiated the first of two six-month 
monitoring periods to test tap water for lead under the Lead and Copper Rule; the second 
six-month period ran from January to June 2015. 22 During these monitoring periods, the 
water system used flawed testing methods that appear to have been designed to underreport 
the lead content of residents’ drinking water. 23 


ation/disinfectionbvproducts.cfm (last updated Dec. 13, 2013) (attached as Ex. 20); see also 40 
C.F.R. § 141.64(b). 

17 Marc Edwards, Test Update: Flint River water 19X more corrosive than Detroit water for Lead Solder; 
Now What?, Flint Water Study (Sept. 11, 2015), http://flintwaterstudv.org/2015/09/test-update- 
flint-river-water-19x-more-corrosive-than-detroit-water-for-lead-solder-now-what/ (attached as Ex. 
21); Marc Edwards, Flint River water is very corrosive to lead, and causing lead contamination in homes, 
Flint Water Study (Sept. 2, 2015), http : / / flintwater stu dv.org/2015/Q9 / flint-river s-water-is-verv- 
corrosive-to-lead-and-causing-lead-contamination-in-homes/ (attached as Ex. 22). The river water is 
so corrosive that in October 2014, a local GM engine plant decided to switch back to Lake Huron 
water to avoid damage to equipment at the plant from corrosion. Brianna Owczarzak, GM says no to 
Flintwater, WNEM, Oct. 14, 2014, http://www.wnem.com/storv/26785625/gm-savs-no-to-flint- 
water (attached as Ex. 23). 

18 See Maximum Contaminant Level Goals and National Primary Drinking Water Regulations 
for Lead and Copper, 56 Fed. Reg. 26,460, 26,464 (June 7, 1991). 

19 See 40 C.F.R. § 141.82. 

20 Id. §§ 141.2; 141.80(d). 

21 See Email from Pat Cook, MDEQ, to Miguel Del Toral, U.S. EPA (Apr. 24, 2015) (attached 
as Ex. 24). 

22 See 40 C.F.R. § 141.86; Email from Pat Cook, supra note 21 (Ex. 24). 

23 See infra pp. 11-13. 



November 16, 2015 
Page 6 of 16 

Flint’s monitoring data showed that some residents’ water contained lead at 
concentrations above the federal “action level” of 15 parts per billion (ppb). 24 These high 
lead levels put residents at risk of abroad array of serious, irreversible health effects, 
including cognitive impairment, kidney damage, and increased blood pressure. 25 When the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) learned of these high lead sampling results in 
February 2015, it notified MDEQ officials that the sampling results raised significant 
concerns about corrosion from lead pipes in Flint’s distribution system. 26 Nonetheless, 
throughout the monitoring periods, the City and MDEQ maintained that these high lead 
levels were isolated and that the data, taken together, demonstrated Flint’s compliance with 
the Lead and Copper Rule. 27 

C. Community advocacy and independent testing prompt long past due 
response from City and State officials 

As the City concluded its second six-month round of sampling in July 2015, and 
notified some Flint residents of elevated lead levels in their tap water, the community 
became increasingly concerned. A small coalition of local groups, including Water You 
Fighting For and Concerned Pastors for Social Action, began working with researchers at 
Virginia Tech to conduct their own lead sampling of Flint’s water. The Virginia Tech 
scientists found that ten percent of the more than 250 samples collected from Flint 
residences had lead levels of 25 ppb or more, well above the federal action level for lead. 28 
Several samples exceeded 100 ppb, and one sample exceeded 1000 ppb. 29 Though aware of 


24 See Mich. Dep’t of Envtl Quality, Lead and Copper Report and Consumer Notice of Lead 
Result Certificate for Community Water Supply (Aug. 20, 2015) (showing six samples with lead 
levels over the action level) (attached as Ex. 25); 40 C.F.R. § 141.80(c)(1). 

25 See, e.g., U.S. EPA, Integrated Science Assessment for Lead tbl.ES-1 (June 2013) (attached as 
Ex. 26); U.S. EPA, Basic Information About Lead in Drinking Water, htt p://water.epa. gov/drink/ 
contaminants/basicinformation/lead.cfm (last updated June 26, 2015) (explaining that “[i]nfants 
and children who drink water containing lead in excess of the action level could experience delays in 
their physical or mental development,” and that “[ajdults who drink this water over many years 
could develop kidney problems or high blood pressure”) (attached as Ex. 27); see also National 
Ambient Air Quality Standards for Lead, 80 Fed. Reg. 278, 290 (Jan. 5, 2015). 

26 See, e.g., Email from Jennifer Crooks, U.S. EPA, to Stephen Busch, MDEQ, and Mike Prysby, 
MDEQ (Feb. 26, 2015) (attached as Ex. 28). 

27 See Nancy Kaffer, MDEQ e-mails show stunning indifference to Flint peril, Detroit Free Press, Oct. 
22, 2015, http://www.freep.com/storv/opinion/columnists/nancv-kaffer/2015/10/21/indifference 
-characterized-state-approach-flint-water/74289430/ (attached as Ex. 29). 

28 Flint Town Hall Meeting Presentation and Distribution of lead results across Flint by ward and zip codes, 
Flint Water Study, Sept. 16, 2015, http : //flintwater study. org/20 1 5/09 /distribution-of-lead-results- 
across-flint-bv-ward-and-zip-codes/ (attached as Ex. 30); Ron Fonger, Virginia Tech professor says 
Flint’s tests for lead in water can’t be trusted, Michigan Live, Sept. 15, 2015, http:/ /www.mlive.com/ne 
ws/flint/index.ssf/2015/09/virginia tech researcher savs.html (attached as Ex. 31). 

29 Marc Edwards et al., Lead testing results for water sampled by residents, Flint Water Sffidy, Sept. 

28, 2015, http://flintwaterstudv.org/information-for-flint-residents/results-for-citizen-testing-for- 
lead-300-kits/ (attached as Ex. 32). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 7 of 16 

the Virginia Tech sampling results, MDEQ officials continued to insist that Flint’s water 
was safe to drink. 30 

In September 2015, a medical study conducted by a local pediatrician confirmed the 
kinds of adverse health impacts that residents had voiced concern about for months: the rate 
of Flint children with elevated blood lead levels had nearly doubled since the City changed 
its drinking-water source. 31 State officials and the Governor reacted by “downplaying] and 
in some cases attempting] to discredit” the pediatrician’s findings, and dismissing citizen 
concerns as “near-hysteri[cal].” 32 

Subsequent testing by MDEQ revealed that at least four schools in Flint had lead 
levels in their drinking water above the federal action level. 33 At Freeman Elementary 
School, water tested had lead levels over 100 ppb, more than six times the federal action 
level. 34 This increase in lead exposure is particularly dangerous in Flint, a community where 
residents are already at higher risk of elevated blood lead levels and lead poisoning. 
Michigan ranks fifth worst in the country for harmful exposures to lead. 35 Tow income is a 
risk factor for lead poisoning, and more than a third of families in Flint live below the 
poverty level, three times the national average. 36 Children in Flint also face high risk of lead 


30 Ron Fonger, Feds sending in experts to help Flint keep lead out of water, Michigan Live, Sept. 10, 
2015, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/09/universitv researchers dont dr.html 
(attached as Ex. 33). 

31 Pediatric Lead Exposure in Flint, MI: Concerns from the Medical Community (PowerPoint 
Presentation) (presented on Sept. 24, 2015), available at http://flintwaterstudv.org/2015/09/pediatri 
c-lead-exposure-presentation-from-hurlev-medical-center-doctors-concerning-flint-mi/ (attached as 
Ex. 34). 

32 Study suggests Flint’s water causing increased lead poisoning, Michigan Radio, Sept. 28, 2015, 
http://michiganradio.org/post/studv-suggests-flints-water-causing-increased-lead- 
poisoning#stream/Q (attached as Ex. 35); Ron Fonger, State says data shows no link to Flint River, 
elevated lead in blood, Michigan Live, Sept. 24, 2015, http://www.mlive.eom/news/flint/index.ssf/2 
015/09/state savs its data shows no c.html (attached as Ex. 36); Did this Michigan Town Poison its 
Children?, U.S. News & World Report, Sept. 24, 2015, http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/201 
5/09/25/flint-michigan-children-show-high-levels-of-lead-in-blood (attached as Ex. 37). 

33 Steve Carmody, Four Flint schools have high lead levels in their water, Michigan Radio, Oct. 8, 
2015, http://michiganradio.or g/post/four-fhnt-schools-have-high-lead-levels-their-water (attached 
as Ex. 38). 

34 Id. 

35 Ctrs. for Disease Control & Prevention, Public Health in Action: Lead Poisoning Prevention in 
Michigan (last updated Feb. 4, 2013), http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/information/healthv homes lead. 
htm (attached as Ex. 39). 

36 2009-2013 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates, 2013, available at http : / /factfinder. 
census.gov/faces/nav/isf/pages/index.xhtml (enter “Flint, MI” in the box under “Community 
Facts,” click on “Income” on left-side bar, then click “Selected Economic Characteristics” under 
“2013 American Community Survey”) (table attached as Ex. 40 compares data from Flint, 
Michigan, to Michigan and the United States). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 8 of 16 

exposure from lead-paint dust, as nearly ninety percent of Flint’s housing stock was built 
before 1978 (when the federal ban on high-lead paint went into effect). 37 

Finally, in late September 2015, the City abandoned its assertions that Flint’s 
drinking water was safe. Nearly seven months after the City first saw dangerously high 
levels of lead in some residents’ water, Flint issued a drinking-water advisory and called for 
state financial assistance to switch the water system back to Detroit’s supply. 38 Two weeks 
later, Governor Snyder requested six million dollars from the state legislature to reconnect 
the Flint water system to Detroit. 39 With additional funding from the City and a private 
foundation, the switch was completed in mid-October. 40 

Following the switch back to Detroit water, some government officials began to ask 
questions about what went wrong in the course of Flint’s change in water sources. 41 
Governor Snyder created a task force to review water management and testing in Flint, 42 
and EPA established its own task force “to provide the Agency’s technical expertise through 
regular conversations” with the City and MDEQ. 43 Governor Snyder has also announced 


37 2012 Annual Data Report on Blood Lead Levels of Children in Michigan 26 (Apr. 30, 2013), 
https://www.michigan.gov/documents/mdch/2012AnnualDataReportOnBloodLeadLevels 41950 
8 7.pdf (attached as Ex. 41); Am. Cancer Soc’y, Lead, Lead in the Environment, http://www.cancer.o 
rg/cancer/cancercauses/othercarcinogens/athome/lead (last updated May 27, 2014) (explaining 
that lead paint is a “major” source of exposure) (attached as Ex. 42); Maj. Thomas F. Zimmerman, 
The Regulation of Lead-Based Paint in Air Force Housing, 44 A.F. L. Rev. 169, 174-75 (1998). 

38 City of Flint Issues Lead Advisory , City of Flint, Sept. 25, 2015, https://www.citvofflint.com/201 
5/09/25/citv-of-flint-issues-lead-advisorv/ (attached as Ex. 43); Steve Carmody, Flint officials 
exploring return to Detroit water, Michigan Radio, Sept. 28, 2015, http : / /michiganradio .or g/post/flint- 
officials-exploring-return-detroit-water#stream/Q (attached as Ex. 44). 

39 John Wisely, Snyder announces $12 million plan to fix Flint water , Detroit Free Press, Oct. 8, 

2015, http://www.freep.com/storv/news/local/michigan/2015/10/08/snvder-flint-watei'- 
reconnect/ 73567778/ (attached as Ex. 45). 

40 Amanda Emery, Flint reconnects to Detroit water, may take 3 weeks to clear all pipes, Michigan Live, 
Oct. 16, 2015, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/10/flint reconnecting to detroit 
■html (attached as Ex. 46). 

41 E.g., Letter from Sen. Jim Ananich, Mich. Senate Minority Leader, to Susan Hedman, U.S. 
EPA, and Gina McCarthy, U.S. EPA (Oct. 21, 2015) (attached as Ex. 47); Letter from Rep. Daniel 
Kildee, U.S. Congressman, to Gina McCarthy, U.S. EPA (Oct. 21, 2015) (attached as Ex. 48). 

42 Press Release, Gov. Rick Snyder, Gov. Rick Snyder announces Flint Water Task Force to review 
state, federal and municipal actions, offer recommendations (Oct. 21, 2015), http : / / www . michigan . gov / sn 
vder/0.4668. 7-277-57577 57657-367761-.00.html (attached as Ex. 49). 

43 Press Release, U.S. EPA, EPA Establishes Safe Drinking Water Task Force to Provide Technical 
Expertise to MDEQ and City of Flint (Oct. 16, 2015), http://vosemite.epa.gOv/opa/admpress.nsf/0/A 
92DE629DB86E66685257EE000579593 ( attached as Ex. 50k 




November 16, 2015 
Page 9 of 16 

plans to launch an “education campaign soon to help schools statewide learn how to get 
their water tested” for lead. 44 

Despite this proliferation of task forces and campaigns, neither the City nor MDEQ 
has announced changes in the City’s lead monitoring practices in the wake of Flint’s public- 
health crisis. Rather, Flint and MDEQ have maintained that these practices are accurate 
and adequate, despite the near certainty that they are underrepresenting lead contamination 
in many of Flint’s high-risk homes. 

II. City and State officials are in violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act's Lead 

and Copper Rule 

The Safe Drinking Water Act (the Act) authorizes citizens to sue any governmental 
entity “who is alleged to be in violation of any requirement” under the statute. 45 These 
requirements include the national primary drinking-water regulations for lead and copper 
set forth in the Dead and Copper Rule. 46 The Lead and Copper Rule obligates water systems 
to monitor and control for lead in drinking water. 47 

Since April 2014, Flint’s water system has failed to comply with the Lead and 
Copper Rule’s requirements for monitoring water for lead, notifying the public of tap-water 
monitoring results, reporting monitoring results to MDEQ, and controlling corrosion from 
lead pipes. 48 These violations systematically result in the City’s underestimating lead levels 
in its drinking water, masking a public-health crisis. The violations are ongoing and likely to 
recur in the future: Flint’s water system presently is obligated to monitor for lead every six 
months, and there is no indication that Flint has changed or disavowed its inadequate 
approach to monitoring. 49 


44 See Lori Higgins, Michigan to launch lead education effort statewide, Detroit Free Press, Oct. 13, 
2015, http://www.freep.com/storv/news/local/michigan/2015/10/13/lead-water-flint-michigan- 
testing/73871480/ (attached as Ex. 51). 

45 42 U.S.C. § 300j-8(a)(l). 

46 See id. § 300g-l(b)(l)(A); 40 C.F.R. § 141.80(a)(1). 

47 See, e.g., 40 C.F.R. § 141.86. 

48 Flint’s water system is subject to the requirements of the Lead and Copper Rule because it is a 
“community water system” not otherwise exempted from the regulations. 40 C.F.R. §§ 141.80(a)(1), 
141.2. 

49 See Tamaska v. City of Bluff City, 26 F. App’x 482, 485 (6th Cir. 2002) (citing Chesapeake Bay 
Found, v. Gwaltney of Smithfield, 844 F.2d 170, 171-72 (4th Cir. 1988)). A water system is required to 
monitor tap water for lead every six months if it (1) exceeds the action level for any monitoring 
period, or (2) “fails to operate at or above the minimum value or within tire range of values for tire 
water quality parameters specified by the State ... for more than 9 days in any six-month period.” 40 
C.F.R. § 141.86(d)(4)(vi)(B). Flint’s water system failed to maintain applicable values of 
orthophosphate and/or pH designated as the optimal water quality parameters by MDEQ. In 
addition, had the water system conducted monitoring in compliance with the Lead and Copper Rule 
during the January to June 2015 period, it likely would have exceeded the lead action level. 



November 16, 2015 
Page 10 of 16 


Under the Act, a “supplier of water” is “any person who owns or operates a public 
water system.” 50 The City of Flint owns Flint’s water system. 51 Upon information and belief, 
the State officials administering Flint’s receivership and the City presently operate Flint’s 
water system. As discussed above, Flint’s Emergency Manager exercised the authority of 
the local government in the place of Flint’s mayor and city council. The Emergency 
Manager managed the water system and conducted its affairs, including making the 
decision to use the Flint River as a primary drinking-water source. 52 In April 2015, 

Governor Snyder removed the Emergency Manager and appointed a Receivership 
Transition Advisory Board to oversee the City’s affairs until the receivership is terminated. 53 
The Board has control over the City’s budget, and must approve all decisions adopted by the 
City Council. 54 The Michigan Focal Financial Stability and Choice Act requires the State 
Treasurer to sit on a receivership transition advisory board for any municipality for which 
the governor appoints such a board, and Governor Snyder has appointed the State Treasurer 
(or his designee) to chair Flint’s Board. 55 The City Administrator reports to the Board, 
manages the City’s daily administrative operations, and directs City department heads in 
carrying out the daily activities of the City. 56 To date, the City remains in receivership, and 
its actions remain subject to approval of the Board. 57 

Accordingly, the City of Flint; Governor Snyder; Dan Wyant, Director of MDEQ; 
Nick A. Khouri, Treasurer of Michigan; Frederick Headen, Chairperson of the Flint 
Receivership Transition Advisory Board; Brian Tarkin, David McGhee, Robert McMahan, 


50 42 U.S.C. § 300f(5). 

51 See City of Flint, Water System Update, Sept. 2015, https://www.citvofflint.com/wp- 
content/uploads/Citv-Council-Water-Presentation-9- 1 4-20 1 5.pdf (attached as Ex. 52). 

52 See United States v. Twp. of Brighton, 153 F.3d307, 314 (6th Cir. 1998) (defining “operator” for 
purposes of CERCLA as an entity that “performed some affirmative acts,” such as “directing the 
workings, managing, or conducting the affairs” of a facility) (internal quotation marks and 
alterations omitted); cf United States v. Alisal Water Corp., 1 14 F. Supp. 2d 927, 938 (N.D. Cal. 2000) 
(applying case law discussing CERCLA “operator” liability to the Safe Drinking Water Act 
context). 

53 Mich. Comp. Laws § 141.1563(1); Press Release, Gov. Rick Snyder, Gov. Rick Snyder: City of 
Flint ready to move forward as financial emergency resolved, Apr. 29, 2015, htt p://www.michigan.gov/ sn 
vder/0.4668.7-277-57577 57657-353433-.00.html (attached as Ex. 53); Emergency Manager Order 
20 Ifll 4.a.6, 4.a.7 (adopted Apr. 25, 2015), https://www.citvofflint.com/wp-content/uploads/Order 
-No.-20.pdf (attached as Ex. 54). 

54 Emergency Manager Order 20 4. a. 6, 4.a.7, supra note 53 (Ex. 54). 

55 S<?<? Mich. Comp. Laws § 141.1563(2); Letter from Gov. Rick Snyder to Hon. Ruth Johnson, 
Mich. Sec’y of State (Apr. 29, 2015), http://michigan.gov/documents/freasuiv/Flint RTAB Appo 
intments 488251 7.pdf (attached as Ex. 55). 

56 Emergency Manager Order 3 4-6, 25 (adopted Apr. 10, 2015), https://www.citvofflint.com 

/wp-content/uploads/Order-N o .-3 .pdf (attached as Ex. 56). The City Administrator was appointed 
by the Emergency Manager and can be removed only with the Board’s consent. 

57 Id. 



November 16, 2015 
Page 11 of 16 

and Beverly Walker-Griffea, Members of the Board; and Natasha Henderson, Flint City 
Administrator, are responsible for the violations of the Act by Flint’s water system which 
have endangered and will continue to endanger the health of Flint’s residents. 

A. Flint's water system is in violation of the Lead and Copper Rule's tap- 
water monitoring, reporting, and notification requirements 

The Lead and Copper Rule requires water systems to identify a pool of sampling 
sites prior to the commencement of a monitoring period. 58 This requirement is designed to 
target residences at high risk of lead contamination in drinking water, such as homes served 
by lead service lines. 59 In violation of the Rule, Flint’s water system does not select sampling 
sites for lead monitoring based on a pre-established sampling pool. For Flint’s most recent 
completed monitoring period, January- June 2015, the Director of the City’s Department of 
Public Works admitted that Flint “thr[ew] bottles out everywhere just to collect as many 
[samples] as we can, to try and hit our number.” 60 Similarly, email correspondence shows 
that the City has, during several monitoring periods, asked its own employees to submit tap- 
water samples, without regard to whether the employees were part of a pre-selected 
sampling pool. 61 

Under the Lead and Copper Rule, water systems that contain lead service lines also 
must draw fifty percent of their tap-water samples from sites served by a lead service line. 62 
Flint’s water system does not comply with this requirement. The water system reported to 
MDEQ that all the sample sites it used during the January-June 2015 monitoring period 
were residences served by lead service lines. 63 Flint’s Utilities Administrator, however, 
admitted that he was not able to verify that all homes sampled were served by lead service 
lines. 64 This is because City records concerning the locations of lead service lines in the 
distribution system are stored on 45,000 paper notecards. Flint began converting these 
notecards into an electronic spreadsheet this fall, well after the January-June 2015 
monitoring period. 65 


58 See 40 C.F.R. § 141.86(a). 

59 Id. 

60 See ACLU of Michigan, Thirst for Truth: Who’s to Blame for Flint Water Crisis ?, https://www.vo 
utube.com/watch?t=9&v=LTQ9irD2fOY (posted Sept. 23, 2015). 

61 Email from Michael Glasgow, Flint Utilities Adm’r, to Flint municipal staff (June 1, 2015) 
(attached as Ex. 57). 

62 40 C.F.R. § 141.86(a)(8). 

63 See, e.g., City of Flint, Lead and Copper Report and Consumer Notice of Lead Result 
Certificate for Community Water Supply (July 28, 2015) [hereinafter Jufy 28 Report] (attached as 
Ex. 58). 

64 See ACLU of Michigan, Thirst for Truth: Who’s to Blame for Flint Water Crisis?, supra note 60. 

65 See Ron Fonger, Flint data on lead water lines stored on 45,000 index cards, Michigan Live, Oct. 1, 
2015, http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/10/flint official savs data on lo.html 
(attached as Ex. 59). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 12 of 16 


Flint’s water system has also failed to sample the same sites across monitoring 
periods or document the reasons for declining to sample the same sites, as the Lead and 
Copper Rule requires. 66 Sampling new sites from one monitoring period to the next is 
permitted only if a site “is no longer accessible” to the water system or “no longer fits the 
requirements of a priority site.” 67 Records show that in the January-June 2015 monitoring 
period, Flint’s water system retested only thirteen of the one hundred sites it sampled in the 
previous monitoring period. 68 It did not provide the required explanation for these 
departures from the previous monitoring period’s sampling sites. 69 Upon information and 
belief, Flint’s water system concentrated its monitoring in areas where it anticipated low 
lead levels, due to recent infrastructure improvements, and selectively retested sites that had 
previously yielded low lead levels. Such selective sampling violates the Lead and Copper 
Rule’s intention that water systems “do not use only those sampling locations with the 
lowest lead or copper levels.” 70 

Flint’s instructions to residents for the collection of tap-water samples also violate the 
Lead and Copper Rule. The Rule allows residents to collect the tap-water samples used to 
monitor lead in drinking water, so long as the water system instructs residents of the 
sampling procedures required by the regulations. 71 Tap-water samples must be “first-draw 
samples,” meaning that the sample must be collected after water in the tap has stood 
motionless in the plumbing system for at least six hours. 72 Flint’s instructions direct 
residents to flush their taps for five minutes prior to letting the water sit for the six required 
hours. This “pre-flushing” has been shown to “result in the minimization of lead capture 
and significant underestimation of lead levels in drinking water.” 73 The water system’s pre- 
flush instruction “negates the intent of the [Lead and Copper Rule] to collect compliance 


66 40 C.F.R. § 141.86(b)(4). 

67 U.S. EPA, Leadand Copper Rule Monitoring and Reporting Guidance for Public Water Systems 25 
(Mar. 2010), http://water.epa.gov/lawsregs/rulesregs/sdwa/lcr/upload/Revised-Lead-and- 
Copper-Rule-Monitoring-and-Reporting-Guidance-for-Public-Water-Svstems.pdf (attached as Ex. 
60). 

68 See July 28 Report, supra note 63 (reporting that the same sample sites were not used) (Ex. 58); 
see also Curt Guyette, Lead Astray: An ACLU of Michigan investigation has found a stream of irregularities 
in Flint’s water tests, Michigan Democracy Watch Blog, Sept. 14, 2015, http: //achimich.org/democra 
cvwatch /index. php/entrv/lead-astrav-an-aclu-of-michigan-investigation-has-found-a-sueam-of- 
irregularities-in-flint-s-water-tests (attached as Ex. 61). 

69 40 C.F.R. § 141. 90(a)(l)(v). 

70 U. S . EPA, Lead and Copper Rule Monitoring and Reporting Guidance for Public Water Systems , supra 
note 67, at 25 (Ex. 60). 

71 40 C.F.R. § 141.86(b)(2). 

72 Id. §§ 141.2, 141.86(b)(2). 

73 Mem. from Miguel Del Toral, U.S. EPA, to Thomas Poy, U.S. EPA, at 2 (June 24, 2015) 
(attached as Ex. 62). 




November 16, 2015 
Page 13 of 16 

samples under ‘worst-case’ conditions,” 74 and goes “against the intent of the monitoring 
protocol, since it changes the normal water use of the homeowners in the sample.” 75 

Flint’s water system is violating the Lead and Copper Rule’s reporting requirements 
by representing to MDEQ that Flint’s monitoring practices are in compliance with the Rule. 
The City’s water system did not provide documentation to MDEQ justifying its selection of 
new sample sites in the January-June 2015 monitoring period, and, upon information and 
belief, is not accurately reporting information concerning whether sampled sites meet 
required regulatory criteria. 76 

The Lead and Copper Rule also requires Flint’s water system to notify each resident 
whose tap water was sampled of the lead results. 77 Upon information and belief, Flint has 
failed and continues to fail to properly notify all residents whose tap water was tested for 
lead of the individual monitoring results. 

B. Flint's water system has failed to maintain optimal corrosion-control 
treatment 

The Lead and Copper Rule required all large public water systems, including Flint’s 
water system, to install an “optimal corrosion control treatment” program by January 1 , 

199 7. 78 After a system has optimized its corrosion-control treatment, the regulations require 
the system to “continue to operate and maintain optimal corrosion control treatment.” 79 
Since April 2014, Flint’s water system has not maintained an optimal corrosion-control 
treatment program. Historically, the water system complied with the corrosion-control 
requirements by purchasing treated water from Detroit. When Flint switched its water 
source to the Flint River in April 2014, it did nothing to treat the Flint River water to 
control corrosion. This failure to maintain optimized corrosion control violates the Lead 
and Copper Rule. 

Although Flint’s water system has resumed its purchase of treated water from 
Detroit, it has not disavowed its erroneous interpretation of the Lead and Copper Rule’s 
corrosion-control requirements. Nor has it committed to maintaining optimized corrosion 
control when it switches water sources again this summer to the KWA pipeline. Flint’s 
water system’s failure to maintain an optimized corrosion-control treatment program is 
likely to recur in the future. 


14 Id. 

75 Letter from Cynthia Dougherty, U.S. EPA, to Rafph Scott, Alliance for Healthy Homes (Sept. 
12, 2008) (attached as Ex. 63). 

76 See 40 C.F.R. § 191.90(a)(l)(i), (a)(l)(v); supra pp. 11-12. 

77 40 C.F.R. § 141.85(d)(1). 

78 Id. § 141.81(d)(4). 

79 A/. § 141.82(g). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 14 of 16 

III. The State of Michigan's failure to maintain a schools testing and remediation 
program violates the Safe Drinking Water Act 

The Act requires each state to establish a program “to assist” schools and day care 
centers in “testing for, and remedying, lead contamination in drinking water.” 80 Test results 
must be made available at schools, with notification to parents and teachers. 81 Michigan, 
upon information and belief, does not maintain a program for school lead testing, 
remediation, and notification. 82 Accordingly, Governor Snyder and MDEQ Director Wyant 
are presently in violation of the Act’s schools provision. 83 

IV. Intent to Sue 

The City of Flint and Michigan state officials have been and continue to be in 
violation of the Tead and Copper Rule’s requirements for monitoring and sampling tap 
water for lead, notifying the public of and reporting to the State tap-water monitoring 
results, and corrosion control. Governor Snyder and MDEQ Director Dan Wyant are in 
violation of the Act’s requirement to maintain a program to assist Michigan schools with 
testing and remediating lead in school drinking water. These violations are likely to 
continue and to recur in the future absent a judicial decree ordering City and State officials 
to comply with the Act. If the City of Flint and the Michigan state officials identified above 
fail to cure their noncompliance with the Act within sixty days, Concerned Pastors for 
Social Action, Melissa Mays, ACLU of Michigan, and NRDC will file suit in federal 
district court seeking declaratory relief, injunctive relief, and litigation costs, as appropriate. 

The name, address, and telephone number of each person giving notice pursuant to 
this letter are: 

Concerned Pastors for Social Action 
2200 Forrest Hill 
Flint, MI 48504 
(810) 394-6787 

Attention: Pastor Allen Overton 


80 42 U.S.C. § 300j-24(d)(l). 

81 Id. § 300j-24(d)(2). 

82 Although MDEQ recently announced “an education campaign” to help Michigan schools 
learn how to test their water for lead, MDEQ has yet to release the details of this effort, incfuding 
whether it wifi offer the kind of assistance with testing, remediation, and notification contempiated 
by the Safe Drinking Water Act. See Higgins, Michigan to launch lead education effort statewide, supra 
note 44 (Ex. 51). 

83 MDEQ has primary enforcement authority in Michigan for tire Safe Drinking Water Act. See 
MDEQ, Drinking Water, http://www.michigan.gOv/deq/0.4561.7-135-3313 3675— .00.html (last 
visited Nov. 13, 2015) (attached as Ex. 64). 



November 16, 2015 
Page 15 of 16 

Melissa Mays 
3714 Beecher Road 
Flint, MI 48503 

American Civil Liberties Union of Michigan 

2966 Woodward Avenue 

Detroit, MI 48103 

(313) 578-6814 

Attention: Michael Steinberg 

Natural Resources Defense Council 
1152 15th Street, NW, Suite 300 
Washington, DC 20005 
(202) 289-2385 

Attention: Dimple Chaudhary 

Do not hesitate to contact us if you would like to discuss this matter. 


Respectfully, 


Dimple Chaudhary /" J 

Natural Resources Defense Council 


1152 15th Street, NW, Suite 300 
Washington, DC 20005 
(202) 289-2385 


Sarah Tallman 
Anjali Waikar 
Evan Feinauer 

Natural Resources Defense Council 
20 North Wacker Drive, Suite 1600 
Chicago, IL 60606 
(312)651-7918 



American Civil Liberties Union of 
Michigan 

2966 Woodward Avenue 
Detroit, MI 48103 
(313) 578-6814 


Counsel for American Civil Liberties Union 
of Michigan 


Counsel for Concerned Pastors for Social Action, 
Melissa Mays, and Natural Resources Defense 
Council 


Enclosure 



November 16, 2015 
Page 16 of 16 

cc: 

Administrator Gina McCarthy 
U.S. EPA Headquarters 
William Jefferson Clinton Building 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Mail Code: 1101 A 
Washington, DC 20460 
McCarthy . gina@Epa. gov 

Regional Administrator Susan Hedman 

U.S. EPA Region 5 

77 West Jackson Boulevard 

Mail Code: R-19J 

Chicago, IL 60604 

Hedman.susan@Epa.gov 

Attorney General Bill Schuette 
State of Michigan 

G. Mennen Williams Building, 7th Floor 

525 W. Ottawa Street 

P.O. Box 30212 

Lansing, MI 48909 

miag@michigan. gov 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Redford, James (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 29, 2015 1:54 PM 
Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Re: Here's what's going to executive staff 


Ok. Let me know 
When I can send. 

Thx ? 

J 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Dec 29, 2015, at 1:48 PM, Holland, Meegan (GOV) <HoliandM2.@iTiichigan.gov> wrote: 

This would be the better version to share with your AG counterpart - it's Jarrod's note to executive staff 
that will go out soon. - Meegan 


Team, 

As you are aware, we have been working closely with the independent task force that has been 
reviewing state, local and federal actions regarding the serious health issues related to water in Flint. 

Although the task force's final report is not yet complete, members have made the Governor aware of 
some interim findings, and there are interim steps the Governor has decided to take immediately in 
order to restore trust in how we in state government keep residents safe and informed. 

As part of this process, Dan Wyant, director of the Department of Environmental Quality, has offered his 
resignation, and Governor has reluctantly determined to accept it. There are likely to be other personnel 
changes in MDEQas well. 

I want to thank Dan for his service. He has been the DEQ director since the start of the administration, 
and previously headed the Agriculture Department under both Gov. Engler and Gov. Granholm. He is 
passionate about public service and protecting our state's environment. 

The situation in Flint is serious and challenging. We will continue work closely with the task force and 
city leaders as we move forward, committed to protecting the health of people living in Flint and around 
our state. 

Sincerely, 

Jarrod Agen 


Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 


l 



Office: 517-335-6397 



Twitter: @meholland 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Redford, James (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 29, 2015 2:13 PM 
Schneider, Matthew (AG); Isaacs, Carol (AG) 
Fwd: Changes in Administration 


Carol and Matthew. 

The attached was just sent to our Senior Staff and Dept heads. 


Sent from my iPhone 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < Agenj@m;chigan.gov > 

Date: December 29, 2015 at 2:02:57 PM EST 

To: Executive Office All < ExecutiveDffic&Ajli>michigan.gov > 

Subject: Changes in Administration 

Team, 

As you are aware, we have been working closely with the independent task force that has been 
reviewing state, local and federal actions regarding the serious health issues related to water in Flint. 

Although the task force's final report is not yet complete, members have made the Governor aware of 
some interim findings, and there are interim steps the Governor has decided to take immediately in 
order to restore trust in how we in state government keep residents safe and informed. 

As part of this process, Dan Wyant, director of the Department of Environmental Quality, has offered his 
resignation, and Governor has reluctantly decided to accept it. There are likely to be other personnel 
changes in MDEQas well. 

I want to thank Dan for his service. Fie has been the DEQ director since the start of the administration, 
and previously headed the Agriculture Department under both Gov. Engler and Gov. Granholm. Fie is 
passionate about public service and protecting our state's environment. 

The situation in Flint is serious and challenging. We will continue to work closely with the task force and 
city leaders as we move forward, committed to protecting the health of people living in Flint and around 
our state. 

Sincerely, 

Jarrod Agen 


l 



From: Redford, James (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 7:14 PM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Subject: Re: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 

Ok. On it. 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Dec 30, 2015, at 6:56 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@rnichlgar;.gov > wrote: 


Today Harvey and I met with the Flint Water Task Force. It was a good meeting. People were pleased 
with the G's statement from the prior day. Captain Kelenske joined us and we had a very good 
discussion about moving forward with the creation of the Flint Water Crisis Agency Coordinating 
Committee (FIACC). Tim Becker and Captain Kelenske provided me with a fair amount of input. I also 
read the City of Flint Incident Action Plan for a State of Emergency which Chris received today (enclosed 
for those who wish to read it as well). I have distilled all of this into a two page plan that I want your 
edits and comments on and a one page organizational chart (now presented in the "governor's colors" 
according to our fine people in Communications). Spoiler alert— I made Captain Kelenske Vice Chair of 
the whole shebang (with the Colonel's blessing) so Harvey wouldn't get lonely. 

Here is my ask of you: 

1) Within 24 (sooner if you can) hours give me your comments and input 

2) Tomorrow I will turn around a final document for Jarrod to review with the Governor either 
New Year's Day or Saturday 

3) Ideally, Governor will approve Harvey sending it to Mayor Weaver Saturday (Sunday latest) 

4) Mayor needs to know that this is what the Governor wishes to discuss at the meeting January 7 
along with financial resources that we still need some estimates on cost from DHHS for 

5) Meegan and Dave need to noodle how best to get out front with this and change the narrative 
focus on Monday's Genesee County declaration of emergency 

I know we are all working way too hard for what should be a rest and recharge period but I do 
appreciate everyone's efforts and I know the Boss really does as well. 

Regards, 

Rich 

<A Proposal to Create the Flint Water Inter. docx> 

<IA Coord Com Org Chart.jpg> 

<IAP Flint Water 2015-12-29.pdf> 



From: Redford, James (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 7:43 PM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Kelenske, Chris 

(MSP); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Becker, Timothy (DHHS); 
Creagh, Keith (DNR); Roberts, John (DTMB); Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 
Subject: Re: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 


I would respectfully suggest: 

1. In describing the "almost complete lack of coordination..." simply as "lack of coordination. The descriptors are not 
necessary for us to get where we need to and may not be RPA. 

2. Re the identity of the Chair and vice chair - 1 of course am a huge fan of our MSP generally and Chris Kelenske 
specifically as well as Harvey - however - with representatives from the County and City being fully on board - would it 
be prudent to have a non-state person as co-chair/vice chair? Seems it could help for the participation we will 
absolutely need to get the process moving together as a team and help minimize the "us" vs. "them" issues. 

That is it for now. I am being told it is off to a movie with my wonderful spouse and our son. 

I will look at again later and may have more. 

Regards, 

Jim 

Sent from my iPad 

On Dec 30, 2015, at 6:56 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) <M!.C.dr^ wrote: 

Team: 

Today Harvey and I met with the Flint Water Task Force. It was a good meeting. People were pleased 
with the G's statement from the prior day. Captain Kelenske joined us and we had a very good 
discussion about moving forward with the creation of the Flint Water Crisis Agency Coordinating 
Committee (FIACC). Tim Becker and Captain Kelenske provided me with a fair amount of input. I also 
read the City of Flint Incident Action Plan for a State of Emergency which Chris received today (enclosed 
for those who wish to read it as well). I have distilled all of this into a two page plan that I want your 
edits and comments on and a one page organizational chart (now presented in the "governor's colors" 
according to our fine people in Communications). Spoiler alert— I made Captain Kelenske Vice Chair of 
the whole shebang (with the Colonel's blessing) so Harvey wouldn't get lonely. 

Here is my ask of you: 

1) Within 24 (sooner if you can) hours give me your comments and input 

2) Tomorrow I will turn around a final document for Jarrod to review with the Governor either 
New Year's Day or Saturday 

3) Ideally, Governor will approve Harvey sending it to Mayor Weaver Saturday (Sunday latest) 


l 



4) Mayor needs to know that this is what the Governor wishes to discuss at the meeting January 7 
along with financial resources that we still need some estimates on cost from DHHS for 

5) Meegan and Dave need to noodle how best to get out front with this and change the narrative 
focus on Monday's Genesee County declaration of emergency 


I know we are all working way too hard for what should be a rest and recharge period but I do 
appreciate everyone's efforts and I know the Boss really does as well. 

Regards, 

Rich 

<A Proposal to Create the Flint Water Inter.docx> 

<IA Coord Com Org Chart.jpg> 

<IAP Flint Water 2015-12-29.pdf> 


2 



From: Redford, James (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, December 31, 2015 6:07 AM 

To: Kelenske, Chris (MSP); Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth 

(GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Creagh, 
Keith (DNR); Roberts, John (DTMB); Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS); Becker, 
Timothy (DHHS) 

Subject: Attorney Client Communication - Flint Water Inter Agency Coordinating Committee 


Good morning: 

I have one final follow up on the make up of the Chairs/Vice Chairs. 

I do not of course have any of the experience in Emergency Mgmt situations that Chris and others involved; so 
ultimately i will defer to others and this will be my last message re this topic. 

I understand how we normally want a unified singular chain of command structure which will be able to respond 
robustly and quickly so that when questions and issues come up answers are provided . This is of course enormously 
important. It has been my experience in life however, that many times not only is the first response to an issue very 
important, but the first and second clarifying question before a responsive action is taken is oftentimes equally 
important. 

This is not to say that we should design a bureaucratic model that is committee filled and designed to be slow. To the 
contrary - it needs to be nimble and strong. 

We need to be fully engaged with those we seek to serve. Equal partners. Equal leadership. Equal responsibility. Equal 
chance to be part of the solution to an important problem. We need our fellow citizens, who will hopefully be our 
partners in finding a solution, to feel they, their city and their city and community leaders are not just part of the 
solution but are leading the solution. If the citizens we seek to serve do not feel this way, they are not going to share 
the information we need to have to fix the problem. 

Likewise, We don't know what we don't know. 

If we have strong local co-leadership - this will create an environment where we will hopefully be able to ask the needed 
clarifying follow up question 1 and 2. 

we can do all these things with a unified State leadership model. I am just not sure we can do it as well as we will all 
want to. 

That's why I think we we should have a joint team led by a joint leadership cadre. 

If this is not possible or desirable, I am sure we will be fully and completely engaged and we will do great. I just think 
this makes it a little easier in the long run. 

That's it. 

Rich - You and your squad will make the right call. 

Hope every one has a nice New Year and I hope the Spartans do great in their second to last game of the season today. 


l 



Jim 


Sent from my iPad 


2 



Subject: 

Location: 


RDS - TAPED Radio interview with WFNT and Jason Cooper 
By Phone 


Wed 12/9/2015 7:55 AM 
Wed 12/9/2015 8:05 AM 


Recurrence: 


(none) 


Meeting Status: 

Organizer: 

Required Attendees: 


Accepted 

GovCalendar 

Biehl, Laura (GOV); Brown, Jessica (GOV); Murray, David (GOV) 


RDS to call: 

Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 


Flint s emergency manager exit 
• Flint water 



Recent articles: 

Flint schools slash debt by $11M, but state to review finances under new law (MLive) 


Flint city attorney resigns; new mayor says she expects to name replacement (MLive) 

.b.t££S&www ; nil!ye : co^ 


Flint Mayor Karen Waver unveils 100-day plan, including audit of city funds (MLive) 


Push to recall Snyder over Flint water crisis stalls (Detroit Free Press) 


der-recsil 


p etition / 7671241 0/ 

Give Flint $50M to replace lead water pipes (Detroit Free Press) 

http:// www. freep.com/storv/riews/c'oiumnists/rochelie--rnev72015/ll/12/fiint-water-sheldon--nee 
l egl si a tu re/7SS 1084 6/ 


lev-msehigan- 


Last interview: 3/10/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 


Notes: Jason Cooper< httt>://wfnt.corn/author/icooper/ > WFNT's News Director and host of Conversations with Jason 
Cooper. Interview will air during Jason's show from 11-noon. 

Market: Flint and Saginaw Metro and online at http://vvfnt.com/ 


Contact: Studio line: 810-743-8446; Back-up: 810-743-8255 


l 




Subject: 

Location: 


RDS - TAPED Radio interview with WFNT and Jason Cooper 
By Phone 


Start: Wed 1 2/9/201 5 7:55 AM 

End: Wed 12/9/2015 8:05 AM 

Show Time As: Tentative 

Recurrence: (none) 

Meeting Status: Not yet responded 

Organizer: GovCalendar 

Required Attendees: Biehl, Laura (GOV); Brown, Jessica (GOV); Murray, David (GOV) 

RDS to call: ^ff*^^!3i| 

Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 

Possibl^fopics^^^^^^^^^^ 

• J r>- 3 

• Flint's emergency manager exit 

• Flint water 


Recent articles: 

Flint schools slash debt by $11M, but state to review finances under new law (MLive) 

http://www.nMive.com/news/filnt/irdex.ssf/20i5/i2/fHra school district slashes. html 

Flint city attorney resigns; new mayor says she expects to name replacement (MLive) 

http://www.miive.eom/news/fiint/index.ssf/2015/.12/peter bade flint city attorney. html 

Flint Mayor Karen Waver unveils 100-day plan, including audit of city funds (MLive) 

http://www.nMive.com/news/filnt/index.ssf/20i5/i2/fiint mayor karen weavers .1.00-, html 

Push to recall Snyder over Flint water crisis stalls (Detroit Free Press) 

http://www.freep.com/story/news/iocai/michigan/2015/12/03/elections-board-reiects-iatest-snyder-rec3li- 

petition/76712410./ 

Give Flint $50M to replace lead water pipes (Detroit Free Press) 

http ://www.fre&p.cQrn/story/news/coiuninists/ roc heii&-riley72.01.5/l 1/1 ?./fiint-w'3ter-shejdon-neeiey-niichiRan- 
1 §£.?. i s t M f3.ll 5 S ■( .084 6 / 

Last interview: 3/10/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 

Notes: Jason Cooper<httg://wm^ WFNT's News Director and host of Conversations with Jason 

Cooper. Interview will air during Jason's show from 11-noon. 

Market: Flint and Saginaw Metro and online at http.://. 5 ^'nt..coiT:/ 

Contact: Studio line: 810-743-8446; Back-up: 810-743-8255 





From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:48 PM 
Brown, Jessica (GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 
Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

RE: 12/9 Radio Briefings 


Did we get updated Flint info for him? 


From: Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 2:56 PM 

To: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) <BedanM@michigan.gov> 

Cc: Biehl, Laura (GOV) <BiehlL@michigan.gov>; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov> 
Subject: 12/9 Radio Briefings 


RDS - LIVE Radio interview with WTCM and Ron Jolly 


Time: 7:25 - 7:35 a.m. 


RDS to call:Mfcy gM l||ai a 

Call at 7:24, wn^cHn/^/vitnin one minute 


Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 

Possible Topics: 


Recent articles: 

Northern republicans backed road plan (Cheboygan Tribune) 

http://www.chebOYg3nnews.com/art.ide/2D15111Q/8tQGS/151109101 

County Commissioners wait on pipeline resolution (Petoskey News) 

http://www.oetoskeynews.corri/featured--onr/countV"Commissioners-wait-on-Dioeline-resolution/article 2b43079f-c4ff 


57c2-bb9a-ccl4Sc59d29c.html 

Senate leaders: Michigan energy overhaul won't happen in 2015 (MLive) 

http://www.miive.cofn/lansing--news/index.ssf/2015/12/senate leaders michigan energy. html 

Utilities stress urgency of Michigan energy overhaul as it spills into 2016 (MLive) 

http://www.miive.cofn/lansgng--news/index.ssf/2015/12/utijities stress urgency of ml.html 

Despite Snyder's "pause," Syrian refugees continue to arrive in Michigan (Michigan Radio) 

tto://mlchia:anradio.om/»05t/desDil'e-snvder--S"Dause-svrian--refusees--continue-arrive--fr!ichlgan#si:ream / " 



l 





RDS - LIVE Radio interview with WSJM and Pat Moody 
Time: 7:40 - 7:50 a.m. 

RDS to call: 

Call right at 7:40, live when phone is answered. Stay on line until phone is picked up as Pat is the only one in studio. 
Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 



Recent articles: 

Road funding deal to be signed (WSJM) 

http://wvvvv. wsini.com/2015/ll/10/road-funding-deal- to-be-signed/ 

Gov. Snyder wants bipartisan group to address (WSJM) 

http://wvvw.wsjni.eom/2015/12/02/goverrsor-snyder-vvar:ts-bipartisan-sroup-to-address-concerns-over-refugee' 



Last interview: 3/20/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 
Market: St. Joe/Benton Harbor- http: /A wAV. wsiro .com/ 

Contact: Studio line: 269-925-9756; Back-up (Pat's cel M M)~ 


RDS - TAPED Radio interview with WFNT and Jason Cooper 
Time: 7:55 - 8:05 a.m. 

rds to caii 

Call right at 7:55, interview is taped. 


2 





Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 


Possible Topics: 



Recent articles: 

Flint schools slash debt by $11M, but state to review finances under new law (MLive) 

http://www.miive.com/nevvs/fiint/index.ssf/2015/12/flint school district flashes. htmi 

Flint city attorney resigns; new mayor says she expects to name replacement (MLive) 

http;//www.miive.eom/news/fiint/index.ssf/2015/12/p&ter ba de flint city attorney. htmi 

Flint Mayor Karen Waver unveils 100-day plan, including audit of city funds (MLive) 

http://www.mlive.com/news/fiint/index.ssf/2015/12/ilint mayor karen weavers 100-.html 

Push to recall Snyder over Flint water crisis stalls (Detroit Free Press) 

http://www.freep.com/story/news/iocai/r»iichigan/2015/.12/03/eiections-board-rejects-iatest-snyder-r&C3H- 

PMMon2767174Ipi 

Give Flint $50M to replace lead water pipes (Detroit Free Press) 

l egi slature / 7561084 6/ 

Last interview: 3/10/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 

Notes: Jason Cooper< hi.tD://w[nt.corn/aiithor/icooper/ > WFNT's News Director and host of Conversations with Jason 
Cooper. Interview will air during Jason's show from 11-noon. 


Market: Flint and Saginaw Metro and online at hUp://wfrsLoorn/ 


Contact: Studio line: 810-743-8446; Back-up: 




Communications Representative 

Executive Office of Michigan Governor Rick Snyder 

0: 517-335-6397 



3 





From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:50 PM 
Biehl, Laura (GOV); Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

FW: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 
ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update.pdf; What is a Part Per Billion.pdf 


Importance: 


High 


This was last night's update 


From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, December 07, 2015 3:34 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV) < scotta 12 @ m i ch Iga ri.gov >; Muchmore, Dennis (GO V) < rouchmored@rnichigan.gov >; Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV) < Agerd@rniehigan.gav >; Emmitt, Beth (GOV) < emmittb@roichigan.gov >; Bedan, Morgan (GO V) 
< BedanM@michigan.gov >; Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@rnichigan.gov > 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) < WvantD@michigan.gov >; Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DickinsonS@michigan.gov >; Edgerton, Shelly 
(LARA) < EdgertonSl@michigan.gov >; Dykema, Linda D. (DHHS) < DvkemaL@michigan,gov > 

Subject: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 

Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

• Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

• Document on What is a Part Per Billion. 

As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. I have also added Richard Baird to this weekly email. 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


Key Actions : 

On December 3, 2015, DHHS released blood lead level testing data. The data covered 
the time frame between January 1 , 201 0, and November 1 3, 2015. The data was 
broken down by population set and by demographic. The population sets included the 
state of Michigan as a whole, Genesee County as a whole, and the city of Flint ZIP 
Codes 48501 to 48507. The demographic sets broke the populations down into the age 
groups of: “Children younger than 6 Years Old,” “Children 6 to 17 Years Old,” “Adults 18 
Years and Older,” and “Total Number of People of All Ages Tested.” 

On December 3, 2015, the DEQ released the lead in drinking water data and final report 
for Eisenhower Elementary School. The findings in the report were very similar in 
nature to those found in the report for Freeman Elementary School. There were a 
number of fixtures and plumbing immediately adjacent to fixtures that were imparting 
lead into the water. The report recommends replacement of these fixtures and related 
plumbing. 

On December 4 and 5, 2015, staff from the DEQ and DLARA conducted a plumbing 
evaluation and subsequent sampling of the fixtures used for drinking water consumption 
at Potter Elementary School in Flint. There were a total number of 288 samples taken 
at 57 different locations throughout the school. 

Positions : 

There are no new positions to report since last week. 

Concerns : 

There are no new concerns to report since last week. 

Significant Events : 

On November 30, 2015, Director Dan Wyant and George Krisztian met with water 
quality expert Dr. Joan Rose of Michigan State University. The purpose of the meeting 
was to discuss the situation in Flint and to seek guidance on approaches for addressing 
the issue. Dr. Rose expressed that she felt there were three different fronts necessary 
to address the issue. These were to create a “Trust Plan,” a “Communications Plan,” 
and a plan to “Get the lead out.” Dr. Rose provided several different examples of 
communities that had undergone similar challenges and what approaches worked and 
what approaches did not. 




FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


On December 3, 2015, representatives from the Governor’s office, DEQ, and Office of 
Urban Initiatives met with Flint City Mayor Karen Weaver and members of her transition 
team. The purpose of the meeting was primarily introductory in nature, and the 
conversations were at a high level discussing the needs of the city as well as how 
communications with the residents of the city could be improved. There was also 
discussion of the lead testing results, both for home owners and in the schools. There 
was particular interest in the sampling protocol that was used to obtain samples in the 
schools. Overall, the conversation was very positive, with everyone agreeing that a 
coordinated effort was necessary to be able to effectively address the lead issue. 

On December 3, 201 5, Director Dan Wyant was interviewed by Lori Jane Gliha for a 
segment on America Tonight. The questions mainly focused on what had happened in 
the past and were tough. The responses echoed the message that the DEQ 
empathizes with the residents of Flint; we are committed to bringing about a resolution; 
we have a plan; we are moving forward; and we recognize that we need to rebuild trust 
in the community. 

On December 4, 2015, representatives of the DEQ (Jim Sygo, Karen Tommasulo, and 
George Krisztian) met with Flint Mayor Karen Weaver and other city officials for the 
weekly coordination meeting. Calling into the meeting were representatives of DHHS 
and DLARA. The blood lead data that DHHS released the previous day was discussed, 
and Dr. Eden Wells provided detailed comment on the data. There was also detailed 
discussion regarding the Revolving Loan Fund and how it might be utilized to help 
address the issue of lead service line replacement. 

On December 4, 2015, representatives of the DEQ (Jim Sygo, Karen Tommasulo, and 
George Krisztian) met with Flint Community Schools Superintendent Bilal Tawwab. The 
main topic of discussion was a review of the lead in drinking water data obtained to 
date. Superintendent Tawwab was informed that the schools, in general, were all 
following a similar pattern in that the sources of lead appear to be coming primarily from 
fixtures and the adjacent plumbing. Superintendent Tawwab indicated that his office 
has already made the decision to follow all recommendations in the reports. It was also 
agreed that a monthly meeting would be helpful to ensure that the process kept moving 
forward. In addition, there was discussion about a document that the DEQ would create 
that would explain what constituted a part per billion or ppb. A draft document without 
graphics was given to Superintendent Tawwab, and he indicated that the final version 
would be a very helpful aid to parents and students. 

Changes from Previous Report : 

• Draft sampling instructions were developed for lead and copper compliance 

sampling, incorporating comments by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA). The revised document is being sent back to the EPA for final comment. 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 3 


• DEQ staff met with DHHS staff to assist with development of a phosphate fact 
sheet. DHHS is the lead on this and will be submitting a revised version to the 
DEQ for final comment. This document is being developed to answer home 
owner questions regarding the safety of the addition of phosphate to the water 
received by the city of Flint from Detroit. 

• Staff from the DEQ provided a “Standby Operations” letter to the city of Flint. 

The purpose of the letter is to define what practices are to be utilized in the event 
of an emergency. 

• Staff from the DEQ followed up with the city of Flint on the status of the 
installation of corrosion control treatment. Pumps were installed on 
November 30, 201 5. It is anticipated that the startup of the system will begin 
during the week of December 7, 201 5. 

Other Item : 

Attached is the draft document, “What is a Part per Billion.” 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environment al Quality 



December 7, 2015 


What is a Part per Billion? 


1 dollar in a stack of 1 dollar bills 62 miles high 
1 dime in a stack of dimes 800 miles high 
1 penny in 10 million dollars 
1 second in 32 years 
1 foot of a trip to the moon 

1 inch of a trip from the North Pole to the South Pole 

1 apple in over 10,000 truckloads 

1 drop of water in 850 aquariums 20 gallons in size 

1 single pitch from every game, of every major league baseball 
team, played over the course of 700 seasons 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


LaHaie, Alyssa (GOV) 

Thursday, December 17, 2015 1:27 PM 
Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Flint Water info from 2013 


This is all I could find that seemed even remotely relevant after expanding the search to all of 2013. I highlighted what I 
thought could possibly be useful. 

Flint ending Detroit' water contract. DWSD looking at its options (Michigan Radio) 

The city of Flint is dumping its contract with the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. Flint emergency manager Ed 
Kurtz signed a contract today to get the city's water from a new pipeline that's being built from Lake Huron to Genesee 
County. Officials with Detroit's system made a final offer to try and keep Flint's business. But Kurtz says the numbers 
were "unreliable." 


Flint City Council approves resolution to buy water from Karegnondi, state approval still needed (Mlive) 

Flint is one step closer to getting its water from Lake Huron as part of the Karegnondi Water Authority. The vote, 
approved 7-1 at the Flint City Council meeting Monday, March 25, may have set in motion the end to Flint paying to get 
its water from Detroit. 

"Going with Karegnondi is the best decision. We have no opinion on the economics of the decision," said Rebecca 
Fedewa, Flint River Watershed Coalition executive director. "If we start drawing water out of the Flint River, we are at 
risk of having to start releasing water from our reservoirs." 

Flint, Genesee County officials huddle on Detroit water proposal (Mlive) 

Flint and county officials are meeting this morning to consider a proposal for future water purchases from the city of 
Detroit. And while they aren't passing judgment on what's been presented, Mayor Dayne Walling said today that "there 
does not appear to be a fixed rate" for the life of the 30-year contract Detroit is seeking. 

Flint residents seeking water bill relief may qualify for new poverty exemption (Mlive) 

hose in Flint struggling to pay their water bill may be eligible for some financial relief under a new program. The "water 
poverty exemption" was unveiled during emergency manager Ed Kurtz's news conference Wednesday, April 10. The city 
will waive the "ready to use" fee of $53.78 that is charged to every customer each month. 

(Mlive) 

The Flint River was not a viable option to provide drinking water to city residents when the water relationship between 
Flint and Detroit was stable. But river water might be used temporarily as the city's water supply now that Flint signed 
an agreement with the Karegnondi Water Authority and will get up to 18 million gallons per day of raw water in 2016 
from Lake Huron 

"I didn't think the city of Flint did its due diligence to the Flint River," Nolden said. "It's not that I'm against the KWA, 
it's that we didn't get all the information." 

The Flint River hadn't been an option, city officials previously said, because upgrades to Flint's water plant would be 
too expensive, the river didn't provide enough capacity to serve Flint residents' water needs and the Michigan 
Department of Environmental Quality would not allow it. 

Flint River water is treated by the water plant only about four times a year under a state mandate to make sure the 
facility is operational as the emergency backup source of water for Flint and Genesee County. 


f J: TJQOforem^srieerin^j.otrf^ (Mlive) 


l 



The city will spend $171,000 to get Flint's water plant up and running on a continual basis, with the potential to use the 
Flint River as the primary drinking water source for about two years while the Karegnondi Water Authority pipeline is 
built. The engineering work completed by Flint-based Lockwood, Andrews & Newnam, Inc. also will allow the plant to be 
used to convert raw water from Lake Fluron delivered via the KWA pipeline to drinkable water in Flint. 


2 



From: 

Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, December 08, 2015 2:56 PM 

To: 

Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: 

Biehl, Laura (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Subject: 

12/9 Radio Briefings 


RDS - LIVE Radio interview with WTCM and Ron Jolly 
Time: 7:25 - 7:35 a.m. 

RDS to call: 

Call at 7:24, wM^mw^vitnin one minute 

Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 

Possible Topics: 



Recent articles: 

Northern republicans backed road plan (Cheboygan Tribune) 

http://Vww.dieboyg3nnews.com/attide/20151110/8LOGS/i511Q9101 

County Commissioners wait on pipeline resolution (Petoskey News) 

http://www.petoskeynews.com/featured--pnr/county-commissionefs-wait-on-pipeline-resolution/articje 2b43079f-c4fT 
57c2-bbSa-ccl45c59d29c.html 


Senate leaders: Michigan energy overhaul won't happen in 2015 (MLive) 

http://www.miive.com/lansing--news/lndex.ssf/2015/12/senate leaders michigan energy. htrnl 

Utilities stress urgency of Michigan energy overhaul as it spills into 2016 (MLive) 

http://www.miive.com/lansing--news/index.ssf/2015/12/utinties stress urgency of mi.htrnl 

Despite Snyder's "pause," Syrian refugees continue to arrive in Michigan (Michigan Radio) 

http://mlchiganradio.0rg/post/despite-snvder-s-p3use-syrian-refu8ees--continue-arrive-rriichte3n#stream/ 


Last interview: 4/30/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 
Market: Traverse City / online http://wtcmr3dio.CQm/ 

Contact: Studio line: 231-947-3479; Back-up: Bfr.WV&TiWii 


RDS - LIVE Radio interview with WSJM and Pat Moody 
Time: 7:40 - 7:50 a.m. 


l 





RDS to call: 

Call right at 7:40, live when phone is answered. Stay on line until phone is picked up as Pat is the only one in studio. 
Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 


Possible Topics: 


Recent articles: 

Road funding deal to be signed (WSJM) 


Gov. Snyder wants bipartisan group to address (WSJM) 

http:/./vvwvv.wsini.corn/2015/12/02/goverrior-snvder-'»vanta-bipartisan-group-fo-address-concerns-over-refuaee" 


Nesbitt's Energy committee trying to pass energy reform 

http://vvww.wsim,corn/2015/ll/Q5/nesbitts-energy-commiti-ee-trvirtg-tO"pasS"enemv"reform"bi'ilS" 

Oil spill, high waves: A Great Lakes Disaster Scenario (Detroit Free Press) 

http://www.freep.com/storv/r3ews/iocai/friichiears/2015/12/05/enbridse-oipenr3e-straits-mackinac-oil 


waves/76728434/ 

Gov. Rick Snyder launches statewide tour to promote skilled trades (MLive) 

http://www.mlive.eom/news/grand-rapids/index.ssf/201S/ll/g:overnor snyder launches state. htrnl 

County Commissioners wait on pipeline resolution (Petoskey News) 

http://www,Detoskeyriews.com/featured“Dnr/countv-commiss;oners-wait-on' 


57c2-bb9a-ccl4Sc59d29c.htmi 

Senate leaders: Michigan energy overhaul won't happen in 2015 (MLive) 

http://www.mlive.com/lansine-news/index.ssf/2015/12/senate leaders michiean energy. htrnl 


HUB 


Last interview: 3/20/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 
Market: St. Joe/Benton Harbor- htt p://wvyw.wsim.com/ 

Contact: Studio line: 269-925-9756; Back-up (Pat's cell): 


RDS - TAPED Radio interview with WFNT and Jason Cooper 
Time: 7:55 - 8:05 a.m. 

RDS to call^^^HfcfiSfl 

Call right at 7:55, interview is taped. 

Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 

Possible Topics: 

• Flint's emergency manager exit 

• Flint water 

2 






Recent articles: 

Flint schools slash debt by $11M, but state to review finances under new law (MLive) 

http://www.n~iliv e .corn/news/fHnt/lndex.ssf/2015/i2/f1ir;t school district slashes. html 

Flint city attorney resigns; new mayor says she expects to name replacement (MLive) 

http://www.rriiive.com/news/fHnt/index.ssf/2015/i2/peter bade flint city attorney.html 

Flint Mayor Karen Waver unveils 100-day plan, including audit of city funds (MLive) 

http://www.rolive.corn/news/flSnt/index.ssf/2Q15/12/fMnt mayor karen weav ers IQO-. htmi 

Push to recall Snyder over Flint water crisis stalls (Detroit Free Press) 

http://www.freep.com/story/news/locai/ry;ichigan/2015/12/03/elections-board-rejects-l5test-snyder-rec3H- 

petition/76712410/ 

Give Flint $50M to replace lead water pipes (Detroit Free Press) 

http;//www.freep.com/story/news/coiumnists/rocheMe -niey /201S/ll/12/fiint-w5ter-sheidon-neeiey-mjchigan- 

l egi siafure/75510846/ 

Last interview: 3/10/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 

Notes: Jason Cooper< http://v^nt.corri/suthor/1cooDer/ > WFNT's News Director and host of Conversations with Jason 
Cooper. Interview will air during Jason's show from 11-noon. 


Market: Flint and Saginaw Metro and online at r4.com/ 


Contact: Studio line: 810-743-8446; Back-up: 




Communications Representative 

Executive Office of Michigan Governor Rick Snyder 

0: 517-335-6397 



3 





From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 


Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:49 PM 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 
Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

RE: 12/9 Radio Briefings 


Brad and Jen are working Off it. Spoke to them both right after out comrns. meeting, i just foHowed up asking for an ETA. 
Morgan is holding the briefing for now. 

From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:48 PM 

To: Brown, Jessica (GOV) <BrownJ53@michigan.gov>; Bedan, Morgan (GOV) <BedanM@michigan.gov> 

Cc: Biehl, Laura (GOV) <BiehlL@michigan.gov> 

Subject: RE: 12/9 Radio Briefings 

Did we get updated Flint info for him? 


From: Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 2:56 PM 
To: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) <B.edanM^ 

Cc: Biehl, Laura (GOV) Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Subject: 12/9 Radio Briefings 

RDS - LIVE Radio interview with WTCM and Ron Jolly 
Time: 7:25 - 7:35 a.m. 

RDS to call: 

Call at 7:24, wM^cHiveMAmnin one minute 

Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 



Recent articles: 

Northern republicans backed road plan (Cheboygan Tribune) 

http://vvww,cheboygannews.cofri/8rtide/20151110/BLOGS/1511Q9101 

County Commissioners wait on pipeline resolution (Petoskey News) 

http://www.petoskevnews.eom/featured-prfr/coufftv-commiss:oners-wa:t-on-pioeiine-resoiution/article 2b43079f-c4ff 


57c2-bb9a-ccl4Sc59d29c.html 

Senate leaders: Michigan energy overhaul won't happen in 2015 (MLive) 

http://www.rriiive.com/lansing--news/index.ssf/2015/12/senate leaders michiean enerey.html 




Utilities stress urgency of Michigan energy overhaul as it spills into 2016 (MLive) 

http://yvwwjriNve.corn/iarBing-rievvs/index.ssf/201S/12/utslities stress urgency of rnl.bfml 

Despite Snyder's "pause," Syrian refugees continue to arrive in Michigan (Michigan Radio) 


Last interview: 4/30/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 
Market: Traverse City / online http://wtcmradio.com/ 

Contact: Studio line: 231-947-3479; Back-up: 


RDS - LIVE Radio interview with WSJM and Pat Moody 
Time: 7:40 - 7:50 a.m. 

RDS to calk BSS SB^ESf 

Call right at 7:40, live when phone is answered. Stay on line until phone is picked up as Pat is the only one in studio. 
Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 

Possib 



Recent articles: 

Road funding deal to be signed (WSJM) 

Gov. Snyder wants bipartisan group to address (WSJM) 

http://wvvw.wsjm.com/2015/12/02/Rove-rr;t3r--sr;yder-war;ts--bipartisan-group--to-address--concerns--over'-rsfiigee-- 

screening/ 

Nesbitt's Energy committee trying to pass energy reform 

http://www.wsim.com/2015/ll/05/nesbitts-ertergy-committee-trving-to--pass--enerRy-rerorm-biils--today/ 

Oil spill, high waves: A Great Lakes Disaster Scenario (Detroit Free Press) 

W3ves/7G728434/ 

Gov. Rick Snyder launches statewide tour to promote skilled trades (MLive) 

http://www.iriiive.cofn/news/Rrand-rapids/irtdex.ssf/2015/ll/governor snyder launches stata.html 

County Commissioners wait on pipeline resolution (Petoskey News) 

http://www.petoskeynews.com/fe3tured--pnr/counlv--commissioners-wait-on-pipeiine-resoiution/articie 2b430/9f-c4ff 
S7c2-bb9a-ccl4Sc59d29c.htmi 

Senate leaders: Michigan energy overhaul won't happen in 2015 (MLive) 

http://wwvv.rnli y8 . C Qm/l ansing- new Vlndex. ssf /20 15/12/senat 8 leaders michigan ene rgy . htmi 


Last interview: 3/20/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 
Market: St. Joe/Benton Harbor- htt p;./Aww.wsj^ 


2 





Contact: Studio line: 269-925-9756; Back-up (Pat's cell) 


RDS - TAPED Radio interview with WFNT and Jason Cooper 


Time: 7:55 - 8:05 a.m. 

RDS to cal| 

Call right at 7:55, interview is taped. 


Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 


Possible Topics: 


^flm^reme^enc^manageFexi t 


Flint water 



Recent articles: 

Flint schools slash debt by $11M, but state to review finances under new law (MLive) 

Flint city attorney resigns; new mayor says she expects to name replacement (MLive) 

.b.t.t£l&wW.W.i£n.!LYe.OT^ 

Flint Mayor Karen Waver unveils 100-day plan, including audit of city funds (MLive) 

Mt&liZw.W.W.i.0.!.LYe : cpm/new^ 

Push to recall Snyder over Flint water crisis stalls (Detroit Free Press) 

Give Flint $50M to replace lead water pipes (Detroit Free Press) 


Last interview: 3/10/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 

Notes: Jason Cooper< http://v^ni.con'i/auihor/:coop6r/ > WFNT's News Director and host of Conversations with Jason 
Cooper. Interview will air during Jason's show from 11-noon. 

Market: Flint and Saginaw Metro and online at hfig.//wfnLcotn/ 

Contact: Studio line: 810-743-8446; Back-up 



3 





Communications Representative 

Executive Office of Michigan Governor Rick Snyder 

Q: 517-335-6397 



From: Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:54 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

Subject: RE: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 

ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 


Jen/DHHS - are working on the updated numbers regarding how many have been tested since the Oct. 1 action plan was 
implemented and current instructions for local residents regarding testing needs and filters. Sounds like the updated 
numbers is the hold-up. She'll send ASAP. 


Brad/DEQ - is sending some talking points to accompany the report. Should have this soon 


From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:50 PM 

To: Biehl, Laura (GOV) < BiehlL(Smichigan.gov >: Brown, Jessica (GOV) < 8rownJ53jSimichigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 


This was last night's update 


From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, December 07, 2015 3:34 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV) <scottal2 @ michi g an. g ov>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <mudimored@michigan.gov>; Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigan,gov >; Emmitt, Beth (GOV) < emmittb@michigan.gov >; Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 
< BedanM@michiKan.gov >; Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@micbigan.gov > 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) < WyantD@michigan.gov >; Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < Pickinson$@micbigan,gov >; Edgerton, Shelly 
(LARA) < £dgertonSl@michigan.gov >; Dykema, Linda D. (DHHS) < DvkemaL@michigari.gov > 

Subject: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 

Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

• Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

• Document on What is a Part Per Billion. 

As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. I have also added Richard Baird to this weekly email. 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



2 



From: Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 5:04 PM 

To: Bedan, Morgan (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Cc: Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

Subject: RE: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 

ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: Flint Update for WFNT.docx 


Morgan/Jarrod: 


Attached is the update for Flint water and the WENT interview. Includes testing numbers, steps families a can take to 
reduce lead exposure (i.e. free testing hotline, where to get filters, etc.}. Also touches on the top three Items and where 
they stand from the Governor's 10-point action plan. 


From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:50 PM 

To: Biehl, Laura (GOV) < BiehlL@michigan.gov >; Brown, Jessica (GOV) < Brownj53@michigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 

This was last night's update 


From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, December 07, 2015 3:34 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV) < scott3l2@michigan.gov >; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michigan.gov >; Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@miehigan.gov >; Emmitt, Beth (GOV) < emmittb@michjgan.gov >; Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 
< BedanM@michigan.gov >; Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) < WyantD@michigan.gov >; Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DickinsonS@michigan.gQv >; Edgerton, Shelly 
(LARA) < EdgertonSl@m8chigan.gov >; Dykema, Linda D. (DHHS) < DykemaL@michigan.gov > 

Subject: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 

Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

• Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

• Document on What is a Part Per Billion. 

As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. I have also added Richard Baird to this weekly email. 

Thank you. 


i 



Dan Wyant 
Director 


2 



Flint Fast Facts for WFNT interview 

From: Comms -Jess Brown 
DEQ-Brad Wurfel 
DHHS - Jennifer Smith 
Date: December 8, 2015 


1. How many people have been tested since Oct. 1 Flint Water Action Plan was implemented? 

• Total of 1,836 tested, 39 elevated results 

o Children 0 - 5: 806 tested 
o Children 6 - 17: 525 tested 
o Adults: 505 tested 

2. What are the most recent recommendations to protect your family from lead exposure? 

• Protecting your family from lead in the water: 

o Get your water tested for lead. It's free. Call (810) 787-6537 to learn more. 

o Use a water filter in your home. MDHHS continues to provide free water filters 
and replacement cartridges to Flint residents at four locations, including the 
MDHHS Flint offices and the Genesee County Community Action Resource 
Department. 

o Run only cold water through the filter. 

o If you do not have a water filter, use bottled water for drinking and mixing 
formula. 

o Use filtered or bottled water for drinking (including making coffee, drink mixes, 
juice, baby formula), and cooking (even if you boil the water, the lead will stay in 
the water and food). 

o If you have to use unfiltered water for drinking or cooking, run the tap for five 
minutes before using the water 

• Testing children: 

o Children who live in the city of Flint should be tested for lead exposure. This 
should be done as soon as possible. 

o The best place to get your child's blood lead test is your doctor's office. Contact 
your primary care provider. 

o Children can also get a free lead test at the Genesee County Health Department. 
For help with transportation, call 2-1-1. 

• Safe cleaning: 

o Safe cleaning is important. Keeping your home clean and safe from lead hazards 
will help to protect your family. 

o Buildings built before 1978 could have lead paint in them. Use wet paper towels 
to clean up paint chips and dust in these older buildings. Be sure to clean 
around windows, play areas, and floors. 

o Wash hands and toys often with soap and water. 

o You can use unfiltered tap water to wipe down countertops, mop floors, and 
wash clothes 


The DEQ continues implementing the Governor's 10-point action plan to protect kids and families in 
Flint: 


1. SCHOOLS TESTING 




• The Governor's plan commits that DEQ will test water in every Flint school. To date, 8 
schools in Flint have undergone a thorough inspection of their plumbing. Crews from the 
state are completing one to two schools each weekend. 

• The story has been the same in each school inspected: lead exposure has been limited to old 
drinking fountains and faucets that should have been changed out years ago. When these 
fixtures are run for a couple minutes, lead presence drops to safe levels. If / when these 
fixtures are removed, it will address the lead exposure in schools. 

• DEQ has not identified lead in the deeper plumbing of the schools. That's great news. It 
means fixing the issue will be comparatively inexpensive and quick. 

2. COMMUNITY WATER TESTING 

• Since September, more than 500 residents have taken advantage of free home water 
sampling through the DEQ lab. Results are updated regularly on the DEQ web site, 

www.michigan.gov/FLINTWATER . 

• Residents are encouraged to continue taking advantage of this free service, but also are 
encouraged to get kids tested for blood lead levels. 

3. LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT 

• The only way to remove the threat of lead exposure in drinking water is to remove sources like 
old faucets and lead service lines. The DEQ is working with the city to develop a long-term plan 
for removing the service lines. This is complicated because the service line is the portion that 
runs from the city system to the residence. It's the part that is mostly on private property and is 
generally considered the customer's responsibility. 

• DEQ worked with Congressman Kildee to get EPA approval to use Revolving Loan Fund dollars to 
accomplish lead service line replacement. 


OTHER VARIOUS ISSUES: 

• Cong. Kildee has renewed calls for loan forgiveness in Flint. The city owes the state 
approximately $20.8 million for past loans, and they're scheduled to be paid off in 2024. DEQ 
cannot forgive old loans; we can, however, build loan forgiveness into new loans. Forgiveness is 
presently capped at 30 percent on new loans. 

• City has called on DEQ to pay for fixes to the broader water distribution system on the idea that 
running river water through the system for 14 months ruined it. That's an unproven statement. 
The system has been in a serious state of disrepair for many years. We have not addressed this 
issue in the media. We are focused on the Governor's plan. 

• Lawmakers have called for the state to create a fund to provide wraparound services for the 
(Kildee says 7,000) kids exposed to Flint water situation. Don't know where the 7,000 number 
came from. DHHS has numbers of kids who actually have elevated blood lead levels. Again, not 
an issue we've addressed or plan to. 



From: 

Kennedy, Jordan (GOV) 

Sent: 

Thursday, November 05, 2015 12:18 PM 

To: 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Cc: 

Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Subject: 

FW: DEQ Seeks Gov. Signature- Letter to EPA - Flint Safe Drinking Water POC - 
NEEDED BY Tues. 11.10.15 

Attachments: 

11.2.15 DEQ USEPA Flint Water Task Force.doc; Information Transmittal USEPA Task 
Force ll-3-15.pdf 

Importance: 

High 


FYi here is the letter that we talked about yesterday for your review. Copying Jess as well. 


Thanks, 


Jordan Kennedy 
Communications Representative 
Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 
Phone: 517.335.6397 



From: Hall, Jean (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, November 03, 2015 4:44 PM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < m n c h m o r e d @ ;n i e hiper:. gov > ; Mcbride, Bill (GOV) <mchrldeb@michigan.goy>; Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV) <Ag&ni@mich:gan.gov>; Walsh, John (GOV) < vVaishj@iTii chi gan.g ov> 

Cc: Scott, Allison (GOV) <scott a 1 2 @ m i ch i ga n . gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <dernente@m;chigan,gQv>; Khouri, Claire 
(GOV) < Khou riC @ m i ch iga n ,gov>; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <VVurfeis@michigan.gov>; Brown, Eric (GOV) 

< Brown E 15 @ m ; ch iga n ,gov>; Blackwell, Rob (GOV) <Biackwelir2@iTiichigan.gov>; Arwood, Cheri (GOV) 
<ArwoodC@michigan.gov>; Hansen, Rachel (GOV) <hansenr3@mich ig an.gov>; Taylor, Nicole (GOV) 

<Tay I or N 7 @ m i ch ; gan .gov>; Brownfield, Michael (GOV) <BrownfieldM2@rnlchigan.gov>; Redford, James (GOV) 
<Redfordj@michigan.gov>; Wisniewski, Wendy (GO V) <wisniewskiw@mjchigan.gov>; Thomet, Ruth (GOV) 
<ThomefR@michig3n.gov>; Stoken, Laura (GOV) < Stokenl@iTiichigan.gov >; Kennedy, Jordan (GOV) 
<Kennedyj4@mich;gan.gov>; Lukasik, Liz (GOV) <Luk as ikL@michig an.go v>; Weber, Travis (GOV) 
<WeherT7@michigan.gov>; Ayers, Angela (GOV) <A.yers A @ mic higan.gov> 

Subject: DEQ Seeks Gov. Signature- Letter to EPA - Flint Safe Drinking Water POC - NEEDED BY Tues. 11.10.15 

Importance: High 

Hello All, 

DEQ is seeking the Governor’s signature on the attached letter to Dr. Susan Hedman, Regional 
Administrator, USEPA, Region 5. The letter designates Jim Sygo, Chief Deputy Director, MDEQ as 
the DEQ point person for the USEPA - Region 5 Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force. 


i 



For your reference, DEQ provided the attached Transmittal Form , along with a copy of the October 
21 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update which includes a summary about the conference call with 
USEPA and MDEQ where the USEPA requested this letter. The attachment also includes the 
USEPA's October 16 press release about the establishment of the Task Force (see yellow highlighted 
text in both attachments) 

Your approval, input, and/or changes are needed by EOB by Tues. 11.10.15. 

If you have any questions or need additional background information, please let me know. 

Thank you. 


Jean Hall 

Executive Assistant 

Office of Strategic Policy 

Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

H a i 1 i 16 @ m I ch iga n. gov 

517-241-5493 


2 



RICK SNYDER 

GOVERNOR 



State of Michigan 

EXECUTIVE OFFICE 

LANSING 


BRIAN CALLEY 

LT. GOVERNOR 


November 2, 2015 


Dr. Susan Hedman, Regional Administrator 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
Region 5 

77 West Jackson Boulevard (R-19J) 

Chicago, Illinois 60604-3507 

Dear Dr. Hedman: 

This letter is in follow up to a conference call on October 20, 2015 between the 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), Region 5, and the Michigan 
Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). The purpose of that call was to discuss 
Region 5’s Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force (Task Force) that was established to 
provide the USEPA’s technical expertise to the MDEQ and the city of Flint, Michigan. 

During that call, it was requested that the State of Michigan provide the USEPA 
with an MDEQ point of contact for the Task Force. This letter is to inform you of the 
designation of Mr. Jim Sygo, Chief Deputy Director, MDEQ, as that point of contact. 

Mr. Sygo’s contact information is below: 

Michigan Department of Environmental Quality 
P.O. Box 30473 
Lansing, Ml 48909-7973 

svqoi@michigan.gov 

517-284-6709 

Thank you for your assistance in this matter as we work together to ensure a 
safe and reliable drinking water supply for the city of Flint. 

Sincerely, 


Rick Snyder 
Governor 

cc: Mr. Robert Kaplan, Deputy Regional Administrator, USEPA, Region 5 
Mr. Dan Wyant, Director, MDEQ 
Mr. Jim Sygo, Chief Deputy Director, MDEQ 


GEORGE W. ROMNEY BUILDING • 111 SOUTH CAPITOL AVENUE • LANSING, MICHIGAN 48909 

www.michigan.gov 



DE-A 

MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 
EXECUTIVE DIVISION 

INFORMATION TRANSMITTAL AND REQUEST FOR GOVERNOR’S ACTION 


TO: 

FROM: 

DATE: 


Governor Rick Snyder via Jean Hall 


Dan Wyant, Dire^f^^^y^ 



November 3, 2015 



SUBJECT: Task Force Point of Contact Designation Letter to Susan Hedman, Regional 



Administrator, United States Environmental Protection Agency, Region 5 

HI 

otiT akeji byJDECf (actipn requested of GoyerndFs Office in parentheses) 1 1 | r 

[ 

Letter (for Governor’s signature - draft attached) 

□ 

Printed Material (for Governor’s signature - attached) 

□ 

Proclamation Request (for Governor’s signature - draft attached) 

□ 

Telephone Call (for Governor’s information - explanation given under “Situation 
Description") 

□ 

Other: 


Governor’s Action Requested By: November 16, 2015 


Situation Description: During an October 20 conference call between the USEPA and 
DEQ regarding USEPA's establishment of the Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force, the 
USEPA requested that Governor Snyder designate a DEQ point of contact for the Task 
Force. Attached are a draft letter to be signed by Governor Snyder, the October 21 Flint 
Drinking Water Action Plan Update regarding the conference call, and USEPA's 
October 16 press release regarding the establishment of the Task Force. Please contact 
Karen Shaler, Executive Division, DEQ, at shalerk@michigan.gov when the letter is ready 
to be picked up. Thank you. 


Contact Person’s Name: Jim Sygo, Chief Deputy Director 
DEQ Division/Office: Executive Division 
Telephone: 517-284-6709 

E-Mail Address: sygoj@michigan.gov 


Governor’s Response (for Governor’s Office use only): 


EQ0111 (05/2014) 














Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• Action Step #1 has been incorporated into the After Action Plan (Action Step #4). 

• It was determined that the information in Action Step #1 0 would be 
communicated better in person and has, therefore, been incorporated into Action 
Step #13. 

• DEQ staff has tentatively identify the week of October 26 to meet with 
representatives from the remaining 10 locations in the Flint Community Schools 
who were not present at the October 16 meeting at the Superintendent’s office. 

• DEQ staff has contacted DHHS to request a meeting regarding lead education 
materials for schools. 

• The first plumbing assessment has been scheduled for Friday, October 23. The 
subsequent sampling of the first facility has been scheduled for Saturday, 

October 24. This decision was made jointly among DEQ, DLARA, and DHHS in 
an effort to ensure that sampling staff could properly evaluate the sampling 
protocol without the added pressure of completing the sampling process before 
students arrived on-site. 

• The DEQ Laboratory has created a tillable PDF form for use in the school 
sampling protocol. This form was created to streamline the information gathering 
process. The form was submitted for review by staff in DEQ, DHHS, and 
DLARA, and comments were subsequently incorporated. The form is now 
complete and ready for use. 

• The corrosion control treatment plan (CCTP) and permit application were 
received late last Friday, October 1 6, and were reviewed. Our review comments 
were provided to Flint’s consultant [Lockwood, Andrews & Newnam, Inc. (LAN)]. 
The CCTP was forwarded to EPA on October 16, and their comments were 
received on October 19. A conference call was held on October 20 between our 
staff and Darren Lytle and Michael Schock of EPA to discuss the main comments 
(EPA’s and DEQ’s) to confirm that both agencies concur with the design and 
proposed corrosion control dosages. We are currently preparing a revised set of 
comments, based on our discussion with EPA. The revised comments will be 
sent to EPA to confirm concurrence before sending to LAN. 

• An Act 399 permit will be issued to the city of Flint to install corrosion control 
treatment following receipt of revised plans, specs, and - as needed - a permit 
application that addresses the revised review comments. 

• DEQ staff has contacted DHHS to schedule a meeting to discuss the 
development of childcare facility guidance. This guidance will be similar in nature 
to what is being done in schools but will be tailored to address the specific 




FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


concerns with younger children and the smaller plumbing infrastructure of typical 
childcare facilities. 

Additional Actions: 

• Standing meetings with the city of Flint have been scheduled for Fridays at 
10:00 a.m. These meetings have been scheduled through December 18. In 
addition, a tour of the Flint Water Treatment Plant has been scheduled for 
October 23. The DEQ be taking video footage of the tour, showing the 
coordinated efforts being taken by the city of Flint, DEQ, DHHS, and DLARA. 
Genesee County Health Department (GCHD) has been invited to the Friday 
meetings as well as the tour, and GCHD is in the process of determining if they 
can participate. 

• A meeting was held between staff from the DEQ, DLARA, and DHHS to discuss 
details regarding the flow and coordination of efforts for the school sampling 
protocol. It was mutually agreed that it was best to only do one school at first so 
that we can ensure that the process runs smoothly from partner to partner. The 
first plumbing evaluation will be done at Freeman Elementary School on Friday, 
October 23. Steve Busch of the DEQ will accompany staff from DLARA to 
answer questions they might have during their plumbing evaluations. The 
subsequent water sampling effort will take place the next day, on Saturday, 
October 24. It was agreed that taking the samples on Saturday would allow staff 
to be able to evaluate the sampling process without the added pressure of 
ensuring that the sampling was complete before students arrived at the building. 

• DEQ Director Dan Wyant, Jim Sygo, George Krisztian, and Karen Tommasulo 
held a conference call with Dr. Susan Hedman, EPA’s Regional Administrator, 
and other representatives from EPA to discuss the EPA’s formation of the Flint 
Safe Drinking Water Task Force. The purpose of the Task Force is to provide 
one-stop shopping for technical assistance for the optimization of corrosion 
controls for the switch from Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to the 
Karegnondi Water Authority. EPA requested a point of contact for the DEQ, and 
Director Wyant suggested Chief Deputy Director Jim Sygo. EPA agreed that this 
was an appropriate choice and requested a formal letter indicating Chief Deputy 
Director Sygo as the point of contact. 

• DHHS has indicated that the total water filter/pitcher distribution for the period of 
October 6 through October 20 was 9,373 units. 

Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


October 21 , 2015 





Shaler, Karen (DEQ) 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 


Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ) 

Friday, October 16, 2015 5:40 PM 

Krisztian, George (DEQ); Sygo, Jim (DEQ); Shekter Smith, Liane (DEQ) 

Shaler, Karen (DEQ); Devereaux, Tracy Jo (DEQ) 

FW: EPA Establishes Safe Drinking Water Task Force to Provide Expertise to MDEQ and 
City of Flint 


FYI. 


From: Josh Singer 
Sent: Friday, October 16, 2015 12:18 PM 
To: Olszewski, Rosemarie (DEQ) 

Subject: EPA Establishes Safe Drinking Water Task Force to Provide Expertise to MDEQ and City of Flint 


Contact Information: Anne Rowan, rowan. anne@epa.aov 312-353-9391 
For Immediate Release No. 15-OPA160 

EPA Establishes Safe Drinking Water Task Force to Provide Technical Expertise to MDEQ and City of Flint 

Task Force providing technical assistance on reconnecting the Flint drinking water system to a new source 

CHICAGO (October 16, 2015) - Today U S. Environmental Protection Agency Region 5 Administrator Susan Hedman 
established the Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force to provide the Agency’s technical expertise through regular 
conversations with designated officials from Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) and the City of Flint. 
The Task Force will be led by the Region 5 Deputy Regional Administrator and will assist with developing and 
implementing a plan to secure water quality, including measures to optimize corrosion control. Task Force members will 
be available to consult with MDEQ and the City of Flint on site in Flint. The Task Force will also coordinate as necessary 
with federal, state and local public health agencies to assist with protection of public health. 

Specifically, the Task Force will provide technical assistance to the MDEQ and the City of Flint to reconnect the Flint 
system to a new source of drinking water (to be supplied by the Great Lakes Water Authority) and to optimize corrosion 
control for the Flint system, starting in October 2015. The Task Force will also provide technical assistance to the MDEQ 
and the City of Flint, as needed, in advance of and following connection of the Flint water system to a new source of 
drinking water (to be supplied by the Karegnondi Water Authority) and to optimize corrosion control for the Flint system, 
starting in 201 6. 

“EPA is committed to working with our state and local partners to ensure a safe and reliable drinking water supply for the 
residents of Flint, Michigan,” Hedman said. “The formation of this task force continues our commitment to providing 
technical assistance to the City of Flint and the State of Michigan.” 

The Task Force will be comprised of scientists and technical experts from the EPA Region 5 office in Chicago, 
the National Risk Management Research Lab in Cincinnati and the EPA drinking water program. In addition, EPA will ask 
the Governor to designate a MDEQ official and the Mayor of Flint to designate a city official, to serve as points of contact 
for the Task Force. 


i 





From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

Thursday, October 01, 2015 5:23 PM 
Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Friday media briefings 


Importance: 


High 


RDS/JA- LIVE Conference Call with media regarding Flint Water Comprehensive Action Plan 

DATE: Friday, Oct. 2, 2015 

Time: 8:15-8:40 a.m. PST 

Location: Via phone from San Fran 

RDS to call: B 

• Call right at 8:30 a.m.; Call will be live immediately. 

• SW will also be on the line to moderate and screen reporter questions. 

Purpose: Media conference call to discuss Flint Water Comprehensive Action Plan 

Possible Topics: 

Flint water Action plan 
Lead in Flint water 
Handling of Flint Water issue 
Reconnecting Flint to Detroit water 

Media invited: 

Flint area media (print, TV and radio) 

Associated Press 
Detroit News 
Detroit Free Press 


Recent Articles: 

Freep: Legislators take action to fix Flint water supply- 

http://www.freep.com/story/news/poiitics/2015/lC?/01/l&gislators-take-ad:ion-fix-ffint-water-supply/73352540/ 

WDIV: Public health emergency declared due to lead in Flint water- http://www.clickondetroit.com/nevvs/pubjic-he(alth- 

eniergency-decS3red-due-to-i&ad-in-fiint-water/35503670 

Mlive: Governor says fallout from Flint water switch wasn't fully understood- 

http://www.mlive.com/news/fHrrt/index.ssf/2Q15/09/snyder says h e helped bring wa.html 

Freep: Snyder finally says lead in Flint water may be problem- http://www.fre e p.com/ s tory/opinion/coluninlsts/n3ncy- 
kaffer/2015/09/30/time-gov- sa ys-lead-fiint-water-may-p)'obiem/73Q88566,/ 

Mlive: Legislative Black Caucus urges state of emergency for Flint water- 


Market: Statewide 
Contact: Conference line 


RDS/JA - LIVE Radio interview with Frank Beckmann on WJR Radio 


l 




Date: Friday, Oct. 2, 2015 


Time: 8:45-8:55 a.m. PST 
Location: Via phone 
RDS to call: 

Purpose: To discuss priorities and key issues you are working on in 2015. 

Pos 


Flint Water 




Recent articles: 

Freep: Snyder appoints Joan Larsen to Supreme Court- 

feS£:P.;//wwwja.nsjngstat.ejournjLcom/sto 

c.Q.y.r.t/I3Q.a3044/ 

AP: Michigan in early talks on taking more Syria, Middle East refugees, Snyder says- 

.te?:P.;//www.crajnsdetroitxomZa^ 


roiddie-east-ref uge es 

WILX: Governor Snyder Says Road Talks Going Well- http:/Avvv'V‘/.vviix.com/honie/^eadiines/Goverr:or-Snvder-Says- 
Boad-Tai ks-Goi ng-Wel j • 330164 301, html 

AP: Snyder acknowledges some mistakes in tapping Flint River- 

http://www,eikharttruth,corn/news/rriichigan/201S/09/30/Snyder-acknowiedges-some--fr!istak$S"in"tapping:-Fl8nt- 


River.htm 


Last interview: 5/28/15 at Mackinac 

Market: Southeast Michigan- online at wjr.com 

Contact: Studio: 313-875-4480; Back-up Producer Terri Leib cell: 



Laura Biehi 

Communications Manager 

Executive Office of Michigan Gov, Rick Snyder 

George W. Romney Building 

111 S. Capitol Ave, 

Lansing, Ml 48333 



2 







From: Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 09, 2015 12:11 PM 

To: Paciorek, Josh (GOV) 

Subject: FW: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 

ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Attachments: Flint Update for WFNT.docx 


From: Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 5:04 PM 

To: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) < BedanM@michig3n.gov >; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Biehl, Laura (GOV) < BiehiL@michigan.gov > 

Subject: RE: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 


Morgan/Jarrod: 


Attached is the upda te for Flint water and the WENT interview. Includes testing numbers, steps families a can take to 
reduce lead exposure (i.e. free testing hotline, where to get filters, etc.). Also touches on the top three Items and where 
they stand from the Governor's 10-point action plan. 


From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:50 PM 

To: Biehl, Laura (GOV) < 8iehlL@roichigan.gov >; Brown, Jessica (GOV) < BrowriJ53@michigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 


This was last night's update 


From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, December 07, 2015 3:34 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV) < scottal2@michigan.gov >: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@rriichigan.gov >; Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigari.gov >: Emmitt, Beth (GOV) < emmittb@michigan.gov >; Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 
< BedanM@michigan.gov >; Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@miehigan.gov > 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) < Wv3ntD@rnichigan.gov >: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DickinsonS@michigan.gov >: Edgerton, Shelly 
(LARA) < EdgertonSl@mgchigan.gov >; Dykema, Linda D. (DHHS) < DykemaL@michigan.gov > 

Subject: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 

Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 


Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Document on What is a Part Per Billion. 


i 



As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. I have also added Richard Baird to this weekly email. 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


2 



Flint Fast Facts for WFNT interview 

From: Comms -Jess Brown 
DEQ-Brad Wurfel 
DHHS - Jennifer Smith 
Date: December 8, 2015 


1. How many people have been tested since Oct. 1 Flint Water Action Plan was implemented? 

• Total of 1,836 tested, 39 elevated results 

o Children 0 - 5: 806 tested 
o Children 6 - 17: 525 tested 
o Adults: 505 tested 

2. What are the most recent recommendations to protect your family from lead exposure? 

• Protecting your family from lead in the water: 

o Get your water tested for lead. It's free. Call (810) 787-6537 to learn more. 

o Use a water filter in your home. MDHHS continues to provide free water filters 
and replacement cartridges to Flint residents at four locations, including the 
MDHHS Flint offices and the Genesee County Community Action Resource 
Department. 

o Run only cold water through the filter. 

o If you do not have a water filter, use bottled water for drinking and mixing 
formula. 

o Use filtered or bottled water for drinking (including making coffee, drink mixes, 
juice, baby formula), and cooking (even if you boil the water, the lead will stay in 
the water and food). 

o If you have to use unfiltered water for drinking or cooking, run the tap for five 
minutes before using the water 

• Testing children: 

o Children who live in the city of Flint should be tested for lead exposure. This 
should be done as soon as possible. 

o The best place to get your child's blood lead test is your doctor's office. Contact 
your primary care provider. 

o Children can also get a free lead test at the Genesee County Health Department. 
For help with transportation, call 2-1-1. 

• Safe cleaning: 

o Safe cleaning is important. Keeping your home clean and safe from lead hazards 
will help to protect your family. 

o Buildings built before 1978 could have lead paint in them. Use wet paper towels 
to clean up paint chips and dust in these older buildings. Be sure to clean 
around windows, play areas, and floors. 

o Wash hands and toys often with soap and water. 

o You can use unfiltered tap water to wipe down countertops, mop floors, and 
wash clothes 


The DEQ continues implementing the Governor's 10-point action plan to protect kids and families in 
Flint: 


1. SCHOOLS TESTING 




• The Governor's plan commits that DEQ will test water in every Flint school. To date, 8 
schools in Flint have undergone a thorough inspection of their plumbing. Crews from the 
state are completing one to two schools each weekend. 

• The story has been the same in each school inspected: lead exposure has been limited to old 
drinking fountains and faucets that should have been changed out years ago. When these 
fixtures are run for a couple minutes, lead presence drops to safe levels. If / when these 
fixtures are removed, it will address the lead exposure in schools. 

• DEQ has not identified lead in the deeper plumbing of the schools. That's great news. It 
means fixing the issue will be comparatively inexpensive and quick. 

2. COMMUNITY WATER TESTING 

• Since September, more than 500 residents have taken advantage of free home water 
sampling through the DEQ lab. Results are updated regularly on the DEQ web site, 

www.michigan.gov/FLINTWATER . 

• Residents are encouraged to continue taking advantage of this free service, but also are 
encouraged to get kids tested for blood lead levels. 

3. LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT 

• The only way to remove the threat of lead exposure in drinking water is to remove sources like 
old faucets and lead service lines. The DEQ is working with the city to develop a long-term plan 
for removing the service lines. This is complicated because the service line is the portion that 
runs from the city system to the residence. It's the part that is mostly on private property and is 
generally considered the customer's responsibility. 

• DEQ worked with Congressman Kildee to get EPA approval to use Revolving Loan Fund dollars to 
accomplish lead service line replacement. 


OTHER VARIOUS ISSUES: 

• Cong. Kildee has renewed calls for loan forgiveness in Flint. The city owes the state 
approximately $20.8 million for past loans, and they're scheduled to be paid off in 2024. DEQ 
cannot forgive old loans; we can, however, build loan forgiveness into new loans. Forgiveness is 
presently capped at 30 percent on new loans. 

• City has called on DEQ to pay for fixes to the broader water distribution system on the idea that 
running river water through the system for 14 months ruined it. That's an unproven statement. 
The system has been in a serious state of disrepair for many years. We have not addressed this 
issue in the media. We are focused on the Governor's plan. 

• Lawmakers have called for the state to create a fund to provide wraparound services for the 
(Kildee says 7,000) kids exposed to Flint water situation. Don't know where the 7,000 number 
came from. DHHS has numbers of kids who actually have elevated blood lead levels. Again, not 
an issue we've addressed or plan to. 



Stephen Carmody <sgcarmod@umich.edu> 
Tuesday, January 05, 2016 11:09 AM 
Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

Re: news media information request 


thanks! 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


On Tue, Jan 5, 2016 at 11:07 AM, Biehl, Laura (GOV) < BieML@.nnchigan.gov > wrote: 
Hi Steve, 


Dave forwarded me your email. Here is our statement regarding the investigation. You can attribute to me. 


"We will cooperate fully with any requests from the U.S. Attorney's Office as it looks into Flint's water 
challenges. Gov. Snyder has appointed an independent panel that is reviewing ail state, local and federal 
actions related to the situation. We are committed to working with Mayor Karen Weaver and county leaders 
as we focus on protecting the health of Flint residents and ail Michiganders." 


Best, 


Laura Biehl 

Deputy Press Secretary 

Executive Office of Michigan Gov, Rick Snyder 

George W. Romney Building 


111 S, Capitol Ave. 
Lansing, Ml 48933 
Office: 517-335-6397 



l 



8iehlL@Michigan.gov 


From: Stephen Carmody [mailto:sgcarmod@urnich.edu1 

Sent: Tuesday, January 05, 2016 11:04 AM 

To: Murray, David (GOV) < MurrayDl@rnichigan.gov > 

Subject: news media information request 


David, 


i just saw the MLive article about the DOJ investigation into the Flint water contamination. 


Could you send me the governor's office statement? 


Steve Carmody 
Michigan Radio 


2 



From: Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 09, 2015 12:11 PM 

To: Paciorek, Josh (GOV) 

Subject: FW: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 

ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Attachments: Flint Update for WFNT.docx 


From: Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 5:04 PM 

To: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) < BedanM@michig3n.gov >; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Biehl, Laura (GOV) < BiehiL@michigan.gov > 

Subject: RE: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 


Morgan/Jarrod: 


Attached is the upda te for Flint water and the WENT interview. Includes testing numbers, steps families a can take to 
reduce lead exposure (i.e. free testing hotline, where to get filters, etc.). Also touches on the top three Items and where 
they stand from the Governor's 10-point action plan. 


From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:50 PM 

To: Biehl, Laura (GOV) < 8iehlL@roichigan.gov >; Brown, Jessica (GOV) < BrowriJ53@michigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 


This was last night's update 


From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, December 07, 2015 3:34 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV) < scottal2@michigan.gov >: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@rriichigan.gov >; Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigari.gov >: Emmitt, Beth (GOV) < emmittb@michigan.gov >; Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 
< BedanM@michigan.gov >; Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@miehigan.gov > 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) < Wv3ntD@rnichigan.gov >: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DickinsonS@michigan.gov >: Edgerton, Shelly 
(LARA) < EdgertonSl@mgchigan.gov >; Dykema, Linda D. (DHHS) < DykemaL@michigan.gov > 

Subject: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 

Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 


Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Document on What is a Part Per Billion. 


i 



As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. I have also added Richard Baird to this weekly email. 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


2 



Flint Fast Facts for WFNT interview 

From: Comms -Jess Brown 
DEQ-Brad Wurfel 
DHHS - Jennifer Smith 
Date: December 8, 2015 


1. How many people have been tested since Oct. 1 Flint Water Action Plan was implemented? 

• Total of 1,836 tested, 39 elevated results 

o Children 0-5: 806 tested 
o Children 6 - 17: 525 tested 
o Adults: 505 tested 

2. What are the most recent recommendations to protect your family from lead exposure? 

• Protecting your family from lead in the water: 

o Get your water tested for lead. It's free. Call (810) 787-6537 to learn more. 

o Use a water filter in your home. MDHHS continues to provide free water filters 
and replacement cartridges to Flint residents at four locations, including the 
MDHHS Flint offices and the Genesee County Community Action Resource 
Department. 

o Run only cold water through the filter. 

o If you do not have a water filter, use bottled water for drinking and mixing 
formula. 

o Use filtered or bottled water for drinking (including making coffee, drink mixes, 
juice, baby formula), and cooking (even if you boil the water, the lead will stay in 
the water and food). 

o If you have to use unfiltered water for drinking or cooking, run the tap for five 
minutes before using the water 

• Testing children: 

o Children who live in the city of Flint should be tested for lead exposure. This 
should be done as soon as possible. 

o The best place to get your child's blood lead test is your doctor's office. Contact 
your primary care provider. 

o Children can also get a free lead test at the Genesee County Health Department. 
For help with transportation, call 2-1-1. 

• Safe cleaning: 

o Safe cleaning is important. Keeping your home clean and safe from lead hazards 
will help to protect your family. 

o Buildings built before 1978 could have lead paint in them. Use wet paper towels 
to clean up paint chips and dust in these older buildings. Be sure to clean 
around windows, play areas, and floors. 

o Wash hands and toys often with soap and water. 

o You can use unfiltered tap water to wipe down countertops, mop floors, and 
wash clothes 


The DEQ continues implementing the Governor's 10-point action plan to protect kids and families in 
Flint: 


1. SCHOOLS TESTING 




• The Governor's plan commits that DEQ will test water in every Flint school. To date, 8 
schools in Flint have undergone a thorough inspection of their plumbing. Crews from the 
state are completing one to two schools each weekend. 

• The story has been the same in each school inspected: lead exposure has been limited to old 
drinking fountains and faucets that should have been changed out years ago. When these 
fixtures are run for a couple minutes, lead presence drops to safe levels. If / when these 
fixtures are removed, it will address the lead exposure in schools. 

• DEQ has not identified lead in the deeper plumbing of the schools. That's great news. It 
means fixing the issue will be comparatively inexpensive and quick. 

2. COMMUNITY WATER TESTING 

• Since September, more than 500 residents have taken advantage of free home water 
sampling through the DEQ lab. Results are updated regularly on the DEQ web site, 

www.michigan.gov/FLINTWATER . 

• Residents are encouraged to continue taking advantage of this free service, but also are 
encouraged to get kids tested for blood lead levels. 

3. LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT 

• The only way to remove the threat of lead exposure in drinking water is to remove sources like 
old faucets and lead service lines. The DEQ is working with the city to develop a long-term plan 
for removing the service lines. This is complicated because the service line is the portion that 
runs from the city system to the residence, it's the part that is mostly on private property and is 
generally considered the customer's responsibility. 

• DEQ worked with Congressman Kildee to get EPA approval to use Revolving Loan Fund dollars to 
accomplish lead service line replacement. 


OTHER VARIOUS ISSUES: 

• Cong. Kildee has renewed calls for loan forgiveness in Flint. The city owes the state 
approximately $20.8 million for past loans, and they're scheduled to be paid off in 2024. DEQ 
cannot forgive old loans; we can, however, build loan forgiveness into new loans. Forgiveness is 
presently capped at 30 percent on new loans. 

• City has called on DEQ to pay for fixes to the broader water distribution system on the idea that 
running river water through the system for 14 months ruined it. That's an unproven statement. 
The system has been in a serious state of disrepair for many years. We have not addressed this 
issue in the media. We are focused on the Governor's plan. 

• Lawmakers have called for the state to create a fund to provide wraparound services for the 
(Kildee says 7,000) kids exposed to Flint water situation. Don't know where the 7,000 number 
came from. DHHS has numbers of kids who actually have elevated blood lead levels. Again, not 
an issue we've addressed or plan to. 



From: 

Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, January 05, 2016 11:06 AM 

To: 

'arthur@huffingtonpost.com' 

Cc: 

Murray, David (GOV); Heaton, Anna (GOV) 

Subject: 

RE: filing on DOJ 


Hi Arthur- Dave forwarded me your email. Here is our statement regarding the investigation. It can be 
attributed to me. 

"We will cooperate fully with any requests from the U.S. Attorney's Office as it looks into Flint's water challenges. Gov. 
Snyder has appointed an independent panel that is reviewing all state, local and federal actions related to the situation. 
We are committed to working with Mayor Karen Weaver and county leaders as we focus on protecting the health of 
Flint residents and all Michiganders." 

Best, 


Laura 

Deputy Press Secretary 

Executive Office of Michigan Gov. Pick Snyder 

George W. Romney Building 

111. S, Capitol Ave, 

Lansing, Mi 48933 
Office: 517-335-6397 



BiehiL@Michig3n.gov 


From: Arthur Delaney fni3iito:arthur@huffingtonpost.cornl 

Sent: Tuesday, January 05, 2016 10:57 AM 

To: Murray, David (GOV) < MurrayDl@michig3n.gov > 

Subject: filing on DOJ 

Hi Dave, I am filing a short item on the USAO opening an investigation into the Flint water crisis. They tell me 
they're working with the EPA. 


First reported here I think: https://twitter.com/ACmofMich iga a/status/6843949SS276615680 


Reporter | Huffington Post 
(202) 624-9396 desk | ■ 
Twitter @ArthurDelaneyH 


l 




From: 

Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, January 05, 2016 11:08 AM 

To: 

'sgcarmod@umich.edu' 

Cc: 

Murray, David (GOV); Heaton, Anna (GOV) 

Subject: 

RE: news media information request 

Hi Steve, 



Dave forwarded me your email Here is our statement regarding the investigation. You can attribute to me. 

"We will cooperate fully with any requests from the U.S. Attorney's Office as it looks into Flint's water 
challenges. Gov. Snyder has appointed an independent panel that is reviewing all state, local and federal 
actions related to the situation. We are committed to working with Mayor Karen Weaver and county leaders 
as we focus on protecting the health of Flint residents and all Michiganders." 

Best, 


Laura Bieh 


Deputy Press Secretary 

Executive Office of Michigan Gov, Rick Snyder 

George W. Romney Building 

111 S, Capitol Ave. 

Lansing, Ml 48933 



From: Stephen Carmody [niailto:sac8rrriod@urnich,edul 

Sent: Tuesday, January 05, 2016 11:04 AM 

To: Murray, David (GOV) < MorravDl(a>rnichi,c:3n,gov > 

Subject: news media information request 

David, 

i just saw the MLive article about the DOJ investigation into the Flint water contamination. 
Could you send me the governor's office statement? 


Steve Carmody 
Michigan Radio 


l 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 09, 2015 5:34 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Holland, Meegan (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth 

(GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: DRAFT task force response letter 

Attachments: DRAFT Task Force response.docx 


Good evening team, 

Here is a draft response to the task force letter that I think covers the needed ground and designates Harvey for the role 
suggested by the task force members. Please let me know if we are missing anything, or if there are points you want me 
to make, realizing that this letter will be distributed to the public. 

Thank you for your assistance. 

Dave 


Flint Water Advisory Task Force Members, 

Thank you for your correspondence on Dec. 7, and, most importantly, for your hard work to promote public health and 
protect our residents as we move forward. Your efforts are both respected and appreciated. 

As acknowledged in your letter, we have taken many steps to address the challenges in Flint as they relate to reducing 
lead exposure. I am pleased to see the progress since October, and recognize there is more work that must be done to 
ensure that this progress continues. 

At the state level, there has been a confluence of efforts between Michigan Departments of Environmental Quality and 
Health and Human Services to coordinate with the Genesee County Health Department, local schools, and our partners 
in the non-profit community. 

These partners are making progress, and we know we can always strive to improve practices and communication for 
continual improvement. 

You make a solid suggestion about establishing a person who is independent of any one of the involved state agencies or 
organizations to serve as the point person to coordinate the ongoing work. I am recommending that Harvey Hollins, 
director of the Office of Urban Initiatives, carry out this effort. Harvey is well-versed in the issue and the challenges 
faced by our cities and will be effective in this role. 

I also support your suggestion of a dashboard to make information about our work and progress more accessible to the 
Flint community. It's important that people have confidence that we are working to address any problems and will take 
the necessary actions to improve interaction among city, state and federal agencies. 

People in Flint and across our state deserve safe, clean water. I want them to be confident that the water coming out of 
their tap is safe for their families. And I want them to trust that their government - at all levels - is working effectively to 
protect them. 

I thank you again for lending your time and expertise to this vitally important effort. 

Regards, 


l 



2 



Flint Water Advisory Task Force Members, 

Thank you for your correspondence on Dec. 7, and, most importantly, for your hard work to promote 
public health and protect our residents as we move forward. Your efforts are both respected and 
appreciated. 

As acknowledged in your letter, we have taken many steps to address the challenges in Flint as they 
relate to reducing lead exposure. I am pleased to see the progress since October, and recognize there is 
more work that must be done to ensure that this progress continues. 

At the state level, there has been a confluence of efforts between Michigan Departments of 
Environmental Quality and Health and Fluman Services to coordinate with the Genesee County Health 
Department, local schools, and our partners in the non-profit community. 

These partners are making progress, and we know we can always strive to improve practices and 
communication for continual improvement. 

You make a solid suggestion about establishing a person who is independent of any one of the involved 
state agencies or organizations to serve as the point person to coordinate the ongoing work. I am 
recommending that Flarvey Hollins, director of the Office of Urban Initiatives, carry out this effort. 
Flarvey is well-versed in the issue and the challenges faced by our cities and will be effective in this role. 

I also support your suggestion of a dashboard to make information about our work and progress more 
accessible to the Flint community. It's important that people have confidence that we are working to 
address any problems and will take the necessary actions to improve interaction among city, state and 
federal agencies. 

People in Flint and across our state deserve safe, clean water. I want them to be confident that the 
water coming out of their tap is safe for their families. And I want them to trust that their government - 
at all levels - is working effectively to protect them. 

I thank you again for lending your time and expertise to this vitally important effort. 

Regards, 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Murray, David (GOV) 

Friday, December 1 8, 201 5 1 1 :58 AM 
Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

FW: Flint News Article and Update 

image003. png; ATT00001.htm; 12 11 15 City of Flint SOP. PDF; ATT00002.htm 


Dave Murray 

Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 


IViurravDt@michiR3n.aov 


517 - 335-6397 


Twitter:@mic 


office 

obile 

Tgandmurray 



From: Smith, Paul (GOV) 

Sent: Friday, December 18, 2015 11:57 AM 

To: Murray, David (GOV) <MurrayDl@michigan.gov> 

Subject: Fwd: Flint News Article and Update 

FYI 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Kelenske, Chris (MSP)" <KeienskeC @ michi ga n. g ov> 

Date: December 18, 2015 at 11:27:34 AM EST 

To: "Etue, Kriste (MSP)" <EtueK @ michi g an. g ov>, "Gorski, Gary (MSP)" <GorskiG@michigan.gov>. 

"Smith, Paul (GOV)" <SmithP29 @ michig a n .go v> 

Cc: "Katarsky, Anthony (MSP)" <K3tarsk yA@ michi g an.gov> 

Subject: Flint News Article and Update 

Note the below article on the Flint water issue. They are starting to follow the emergency management 
process to include implementing their Support Emergency Operations Plan (Flint's is attached). The 
County has an Emergency Operations Plan that Flint is to support. Opening an EOC is key for 
coordination and that has been done at the city level (at least to some degree but probably not at the 
staffing level it needs to be at this time). 

In a letter to Weaver Thursday, Dec. 17, Curtis says county guidelines and state law call for him to 
consult with the county's emergency management coordinator -- Sheriff Robert Pickell -- and 
Michigan State Police once he has been given the declaration. 

"Upon such consultation and review of the city's declaration of emergency and upon determining that 
the situation is beyond the capabilities of the county to handle, I as the county board chair, may then 
declare a state of emergency and request assistance from the state of Michigan and a governor's 
declaration," Curtis' letter says. 


l 


We are working to make sure we have all the information needed to ensure the Mayor and County 
Commissioner understand the limitations of the Emergency Management Act and Stafford Act. They 
may find that the energy they are spending hoping for a federal emergency declaration may be better 
spent looking to HUD or EPA for assistance. A better job is needed to manage expectations which I will 
work with others on that. We will also make sure they understand what information we would need 
before we look at a Governor or Presidential declaration. They cannot just ask for a Governor's 
declaration ... they need to provide us information as to why they need it and what they (Flint and the 
County) have done thus far. 

As outlined in the Michigan Emergency Management Plan, Local EM programs must ensure that local 
disaster relief forces are utilized to the maximum extent possible, including the use of local contractors, 
activation of mutual aid and other standing agreements, and use of nearby resources. State disaster 
assistance is used to supplement local efforts and resources, and to help relieve extraordinary burden. It 
is NOT to be used for simple budgetary relief or to relieve hardship. FEMA's first questions will be, "What 
is it (specifically) they need that they cannot get from others." 


Genesee County chairman says he can send Flint disaster request to governor 

Ron Fonger 

MLive 

12.18.15 

(This story has been updated with comment from Flint ayor Karen Weaver.) 

FLINT, Ml -- Genesee County Board of Commissioners Chairman Jamie Curtis says he is authorized to 
forward Flint's request for a disaster declaration to the governor and plans to meet with Mayor Karen 
Weaver about it next week. 

In a letter to Weaver Thursday, Dec. 17, Curtis says county guidelines and state law call for him to 
consult with the county's emergency management coordinator - Sheriff Robert Pickell -- and Michigan 
State Police once he has been given the declaration. 

"Upon such consultation and review of the city's declaration of emergency and upon determining that 
the situation is beyond the capabilities of the county to handle, I as the the county board chair, may 
then declare a state of emergency and request assistance from the state of Michigan and a governor's 
declaration," Curtis' letter says. 

Curtis declined to comment further on the matter, but he chairman's letter says he will "do whatever I 
can ... to assist the city of Flint as it continues to struggle with its emergency water situation." 

Weaver said she plans to meet with Curtis and other emergency management officials Monday, Dec. 21, 
to work on the request. 

Earlier this week, Curtis said he did not plan to call a special meeting of the county Board of 
Commissioners to consider the disaster request but would add the issue to the agenda of the county 
board at its next meeting on Jan. 4. 

The mayor has said state and federal funds are needed to respond to health problems caused by lead in 
drinking water here and to replace thousands of lead service lines in the city. 

Weaver's declaration, read to the City Council Monday, Dec. 14, did not include an estimate of damages 
suffered by the city and residents. 


2 




To support the request for disaster relief, the city also announced that it has enacted its "Support 
Emergency Operations Plan" and opened an "Emergency Operations Center." 


Sean Kammer, assistant to the city administrator, said the center is available to answer questions from 
residents and will be used to coordinate relief efforts. 

The EOC is located in Flint Fire Station 1, 310 E. Fifth St., and the center can be reached by calling 810- 
237-6888, extension 5005 from 8 a.m. until 5 p.m. Monday through Friday. 

http://www.miive.CQm/riews/fjint/index.ssf/2Q15/12/genesee county board chair say.htmj#ineart m 


Chris 

Capt. Chris A. Kelenske 

Deputy State Director/Commander 

Emergency Management and Flomeland Security Division 

Michigan State Police 

4000 Collins Road 

Lansing, Ml 48910 

(517) 333-5042 

"A PROUD tradition of SERVICE through EXCELLENCE, INTEGRITY, and COURTESY." 


3 






City of Flint, Michigan 
Support Emergency Operations Plan 

September 24, 2014 


A support Plan to the Genesee County Emergency Action Guidelines 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Signature Page 

Introduction to the Plan J 

Purpose 1 

Scope 1 

Plan Maintenance and Implementation 1 

Emergency Management Program Oversight 1 

Basic Information 2 

Community Profile 2 

Emergency Management Authority 2 

Response Resources 2 

Emergency Management Organization 3-4 

General Emergency Management Guidelines 5 

Emergency Response Procedures 6-7 

Addenda: Emergency Action Guidelines 8 

Attachment A: Direction and Control 9 

Attachment B: Fire Services 10 

Appendix 1 : Hazmat Response Procedures IT 

Attachment C: Law Enforcement 12 

Attachment D: Warning and Communications .13 

Attachment E: Public Information 14 

Appendix 1: City Council 15 

Attachment F: Damage Assessment 16 

Attachment G: Public Works 17 

Attachment El: Emergency Medical Services 1 8 

Attachment!: Human Services 19 

Appendix 1 : Resources and Support Services 20 



SIGNATURE PAGE 


To all Recipients: 


Transmitted herewith is the Support Emergency Operations Plan for the City of Flint in support to the 
Genesee County Emergency Action Guidelines (EAG). The plan provides a framework for the City of 
Flint to use in performing emergency functions before, during, and after a natural disaster, 
technological incident or a hostile attack. 


The policies contained herein do not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, 
sex, age, disability or political beliefs. 


This plan was adopted by Flint City under Resolution No. 
Dated . It supersedes all previous plans. 


Signature of Chief Executive Official (Mayor) 


1 2dk 1-5 

Date 


Dr. Karen Weaver 


CITY OF FLINT, MICHIGAN 


INTRODUCTION TO THE PLAN 


I. Purpose 

The City of Flint has elected to be incorporated into the Genesee County Emergency Management 
Program. By becoming part of the county emergency management program, the City of Flint and 
Genesee County have certain responsibilities to each other, This Support Emergency Operations Plan 
has been developed to identify the responsibilities between the City of Flint and Genesee County in 
regards to pre-disaster emergency management activities. It also provides for City of Flint government 
agencies to respond to various types of emergencies or disasters that affect the community. This 
support plan is to be used in concurrence with the Genesee County Emergency Action Guideline, as it 
is a supporting document. The support plan will be maintained in accordance with the most current 
standards of the Genesee County Emergency Action Guidelines. Review of this support plan shall be 
accomplished concurrently with the county plan. 

II. Scope 

This plan is a flexible document in which changes from the content of the plan may occur due to 
unique nature of emergencies. Each agency that has a supported role in this plan or its elements has 
developed Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) which provides systematic instructions for 
accomplishing assigned functions. In addition, to support emergency preparedness and response 
efforts, the local government also conducts other activities such as personnel training, participating in 
exercises, encouraging chronic disease prevention techniques; educate the public on awareness 
activities, and use of appropriate land use planning decisions for mitigation and prevention purposes as 
well. Through this plan, the City of Flint continues to implement the National Incident Management 
System, participating in efforts to provide an effective and efficient incident management operation. 

III. Plan Maintenance and Implementation 

The plan has been developed together with local community, and county officials to ensure 
consistency within the county emergency management program documents. The plan is required to be 
approved by the City of Flint’s Chief Executive Official every four years, or whenever the CEO 
changes and is to be forwarded to the County Emergency Management Office. Upon approval, it will 
be implemented, tested through exercises in concurrence with County officials, and review/updated to 
maintain currentness with the Genesee County Emergency Action Guidelines. 

This plan has been provided to all municipal agencies, elected officials, the county emergency 
management office and the MSP/EMHSD district coordinator. 

IV. Emergency Management Program Oversight 

The City of Flint has appointed the Chief of Fire to serve as the city’s emergency management liaision 
responsible for working with the County Emergency Management Coordinator in matters pertaining to 
emergency management for the municipality. Pursuant the requirements in P.A. 390, of 1976, as 
amended, Section 19, Genesee County has adopted a resolution that incorporates the City of Flint into 
its emergency management program, necessary for diaster assistance. 


1 



CITY OF FLINT, MICHIGAN 


BASIC INFORMATION 


I. Community Profile 

The City of Flint is situated in the center of Genesee County. At 33.42 square miles, it is the county’s 
largest city. According to the United States Census Bureau, Flint’s estimated population is 99,763. 

Flint has an average number of people identified as individuals with special/functional needs for a 
city of its size. Many of these individuals reside in congregate care centers, but others reside in non- 
group homes where help is provided as needed or on-call. 

According to the Genesee County Hazard Mitigation Plan, the three situations the community is most 
vulnerable to is: inclement weather (e.g. thunderstorms, hail, lightning and severe wind storms, snow, 
tornadoes), structure fires and hazardous material incidents. All of these incidents can happen 
anywhere within the community, but hazardous material incidents are more likely to occur on the 
major expressways and highways. 1-475, 1-69, M-21 & M-54 all pass through Flint while 1-75/US 23 is 
very close to its western border. More information regarding hazard vulnerability can be found in the 
County’s Hazard Mitigation Plan/ Analysis. 

Within the community, there are 19 sites that contain extremely hazardous materials. Pursuant to 
SARA Title III, off-site emergency response plans have been developed by the LEPC to prepare the 
fire department(s) to respond to the specific hazardous materials on the sites. In addition, the owners 
of the site(s) have reported the types of hazardous material that is housed on-site, as required by the 
Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act. 

II. Emergency Management Authority 

Pursuant to P.A. 390 of 1976, as amended, the municipal CEO may declare a local state of emergency 
for the City of Flint. Also, Sections 1-801 and 3-306 of the Flint City Charter describe procedures 
regarding emergency luies and ordinances. Upon a declaration, PA 390 also authorizes the CEO to 
issue directives, such as restrictions to travel on local roads. The local declaration activates this 
emergency plan as well as the emergency operations center to conduct activities to ensure the safety of 
people, property, and the environment. 

Since the City of Flint has been a recipient of federal preparedness assistance, a resolution has been 
adopted by the local government for establishing the National Incident Management System as the 
standard for incident management for all-hazards. Through the adoption, the City continues to 
implement the concepts of the NIMS through training, planning, and exercising activities. 

III. Response Resources 

The City of Flint maintains fulltime departments of both Police and Fire. They are responsible for 
providing public safety and welfare to the community. Each department is comprised of qualified 
emergency personnel, and maintains equipment capable of responding to emergencies. A list of 
resources that the departments use for emergency situations can be requested through the municipal 
emergency management liaison. Under certain circumstances, if the incident requires additional 
resources beyond the capability of the City of Flint, the CEO may enact mutual aid. This is a familiar 
practice within both departments. 


2 



IV. Emegency Management Organization 


The City of Flint emergency management organization consists of a number of departments 
responsible for conducting activities in response to emergencies within the community. These 
departments have been assigned to specific emergency functions for which the municipality has 
identified necessary in order to provide an effective response to secure the safety of people, property, 
and the environment. Each agency is responsible for implementing pre-disaster activities to help 
prevent and/or prepare for various hazards that the community is vulnerable to such as: chronic 
diseases, flooding, hazardous material spills, inclement weather, tornadoes, and public disturbance to 
name a few; a more profound list can be found in the County's Hazard Mitigation Plan/Analysis. 
Prevention and preparedness activities include: awareness training, exercising, hygienic practices to 
prevent spreading of infectious diseases, stockpiling equipment, and educating people on how to care 
for themselves during an emergency. 

The CEO serves as the incident manager for municipal coordination. At his/her side includes the 
Finance Director and the Emergency Management Liaison (EML). The EML’s duties include 
planning, operations, and logistics. 

The table lists the functions, assigned agencies, primary point of contact of municipal EOC 
representatives. 


Function 

Agency 

Primary Contact 

Direction and Control 

City Hall 

Dr. Karen Weaver, Mayor 


City Hall 

City Administrator Natasha L. Henderson 

Fire Services 

Fire Department 

Fire Chief David Cox Jr. 

Law Enforcement 

Police Department 

Police Chief James Tolbert 

Warning & Communications 

Genesee County 91 1 
(GCCD) 

Dave Ackley 

Public Information 

CityPIO 

Sean Kammer 

Damage Assessment 

Assesments 

Assessor William E. Fowler 

Public Works 

DPW - Utilities 

-Transportation 

Kay Muhammad 

Emergency Medical Services 

Fire Department 

Fire Chief David Cox Jr. 

Human Services 

Fire Department 

Emergency Management Liaison 
Fire Chief David Cox Jr. 

Finance 

Finance Department 

Dawn Steele 


3 




























Line of Succession 


The following is a list of the 2 nd and 3 rd alternates for each agency/function identified in the plan to 
maintain the emergency tasks assigned. 


Agency 

2 nd Alternate 

3 rd Alternate 

City Hall 

City Administrator 

Finance Director 

Fire Department 

Safety/Training Officer 

On Duty District Commander 

Police Department 

Captain Collin Birnie 

Captain Leigh Golden 

Genesee County 911 (GCCD) 

911 Supervisor Tabit 

On Duty Shift Supervisor 

Public Information Official 

Sean Kammer 

Maxine Murray 

Assesments 

Deputy Assesor 
Jacquetta Overton 

Support Supervisor 
Tracy Weiss 

DPW - Utilities Department 
- Transportation Dept. 

Kay Muhammad 

Rob Bincsik 
Betty Wideman 

Emergency Medical Services 

On Duty District Commander 

On Duty Ranking Officer 

Finance Department 

Dawn Steele 

Patrick Jones 














CITY OF FLINT, MICHIGAN 
GENERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES 

The following guidelines are general to the municipality, all agencies, and individuals who have a role 

in responding to an emergency within the community and coordinated by the City of Flint. Being that 

emergency planning is a work in progress guidelines are continuously reviewed and modified due to 

the situation and complexity of incidents. 

a) Report to the local emergency operations center when activated for scheduled exercises or 
disasters, or delegate another individual to staff the EOC and implement the plan. 

b) Implement mutual aid agreements or contracts with other organizations to supplement local 
resources that have been exhausted. 

c) Ensure compliance with this plan and the County Emergency Plan, and any pertinent procedures 
and documents issued, which impact the provision of emergency services in the municipality. 

d) Train department emergency personnel in emergency management functions and NIMS/ICS 
concepts. 

e) Assists in the development, review and maintenance of the plan and of the County EOP . 

f) Develop and maintain standard operating procedures for specific functions or actions identified in 
the plan. 

g) Maintain a list of resources available by the departments/agencies. 

h) Protect records and other resources deemed essential for continuing government functions and each 
agency’s emergency operations in accordance to procedures and policies. 

i) Establish mutual aid agreements and/or contracts with other jurisdictions/entities to supplement 
municipal resources. 

j) Establish a system of coordination, such as the incident command system, within the EOC. Field 
operations, however, are required to use the incident command system. 

k) Participate in the review and update of this emergency operations plan, in accordance to a schedule 
identified by the municipal emergency management liaison and the county emergency management 
coordinator. 

l) Adapt and provide printed emergency management materials and verbal messages to those who are 
vision impaired, non-English speaking, or deaf/hard of hearing. 

m) Conduct pre-disaster public awareness activities including education classes, self-care guidelines, 
communications plans, and protocols. 

n) Make recommendations to the CEO regarding protective actions. 

o) Record and log significant events throughout the duration of the emergency, as well as the 
decisions made by the incident commander and municipal CEO. 

p) Continuously conduct emergency planning activities as it is a work-in-progress, periodically being 
reviewed and updated. 

q) Understand your department’s collective bargaining agreement as it pertains to emergencies (e.g. 
employee callbacks, pay rate changes. 


5 



CITY OF FLINT 


EMERGENCY RESPONSE PROCEDURES 


The following are procedures that the City of Flint conducts and coordinates with the county in 
response to a local state of emergency. 


a) Information about a potential emergency should be directed to the Emergency Management 
Liaison (EML). 

b) Assure that the municipal emergency response agencies, elected officials, and the county 
emergency management coordinator are notified of the situation. 

c) Municipal agencies assess the nature and scope of the emergency or disaster. 

d) If the situation can be handled locally, do so, using the following sequenced guidelines. 

a. The EML advises the CEO and coordinates all emergency response actions. 

b. The CEO declares a local state of emergency and notifies the county emergency 
management coordinator of this action. 

c. A local state of emergency declaration is forwarded to the county office. 

d. The emergency management liaison activates the emergency operations center (EOC). The 
EOC is located within Flint Fire Station #1 located at 310 E. Fifth St. If this location is 
unavailable an alternate locations is at the Genesee County Sheriffs Department. 

e. The EOC shall establish an incident tracking system such as the FBI’s Virtual Command 
Center. 

f. Emergency Operations Center representatives are notified, through Genesee County 9 1 1 , by 
the municipal Emergency Management Liaison to report to the EOC. 

g. The EML directs departments/agencies to respond to the emergency situation in accordance 
to each agency’s functional guidelines indicated in the attachments to this plan. These 
departments/agencies shall report out their progress to the EOC on the hour. 

h. The CEO issues directives as to travel restrictions on local roads and recommends 
protective actions from the commanding agency. Protective action recommendations will 
be based on weather forecasting and if the incident complexity increases due to inability to 
respond rapidly and with a “ready” supply of resources to mitigate the incident. 

i. Notify the public officials, as well as the public, of the situation, through the Public 
Information Official, and take appropriate actions. 

j. Keep the county emergency management coordinator informed of the situation and actions 
taken. 


6 



e) If municipal resources become exhausted or if special resources are needed, request county 
assistance through the county emergency management coordinator. 

f) If assistance is requested, the county emergency management coordinator assesses the situation 
and makes recommendations on the type/level of assistance. The County will also take the 
following steps: 

1 . Activate the County Emergency Operations Center 

2. Activate the County Emergency Operations Plan/Emergency Action Guidelines 

3. Respond with county resources as requested 

4. Activate mutual aid agreements 

5. Coordinate county resources with municipal resources 

6. Notify Michigan State Police/ Emergency Management and Homeland Security 
(MSP/EMHSD) District Coordinator. 

7. Develop a jurisdiction situation report and a damage and injury assessment report via 
and submit to the MSP/EMHSD. 

8. Assist the municipality with prioritizing and allocating resources. 

g) If county resources are exhausted, the county makes a request to the Governor to declare a state 
of emergency or state of disaster in accordance with procedures set forth in PA 390, as 
amended. The county shall not request state assistance or a declaration of a state of disaster or 
a state of emergency unless requested to do so by the CEO of City of Flint if the situation 
occurs solely within the confines of the municipality. 

h) If state assistance is requested, the MSP/EMHSD District Coordinator, in conjunction with die 
county emergency management coordinator and municipal emergency management liaison, 
assess the disaster or emergency situation and recommends the necessary resources that are 
required for its prevention, mitigation, or relief efforts. 

i) After completing the assessment the MSP/EMHSD District Coordinator immediately notifies 
the State Director of Emergency Management and Homeland Security of the situation. 

j) The State Director of Emergency Management and Homeland Security notifies the Governor 
and makes recommendations. 

k) If state assistance is granted, procedures are followed in accordance to the Michigan 
Emergency Management Plan and the County Emergency Operations Plan. 


7 



ADDENDA 


CITY OF FLINT 


EMERGENCY ACTION GUIDELINES 

The following attachments provide guidelines for each function that has been assigned to the agencies 
in response to an emergency or disaster situation. 

Attachment A: Direction and Control 
Attachment B: Fire Services 
Attachment C: Law Enforcement 
Attachment D: Warning and Communications 
Attachment E: Public Information 
Attachment F: Damage Assessment 
Attachment G: Public Works 
Attachment H: Emergency Medical Services 
Attachment I: Human Services 

Each agency assigned is responsible for maintaing the guidelines, as well as approving any changes to 
the guidelines or changes to the official responsible for implementation. 


8 



ATTACHMENT A 


DIRECTION AND CONTROL 

The Chief Executive Official, with support from the Emergency Management Liaison, is responsible 
for directing and controlling emergency management operations. The following guidelines represent a 
checklist of actions that the CEO and liaison must consider for providing an effective response to an 
emergency or disaster situation, 


a) Declare a local state of emergency or disaster and notify the county emergency management office. 

b) Issue orders and directives, i.e., travel restrictions, and recommend protective actions to be taken 
by tire general public. 

c) Activates and maintains the local emergency operations center. 

d) Provide for continuity of operations. 

e) Generate and disseminate information to the public via Public Information Official. 

f) Seek federal post-disaster funds, as available, as well as pre-disaster assistance. 

g) Maintain record of activity regarding decisions on emergency actions. 

h) Review and evaluate assessment data. 

i) Maintain liaison with state and federal officials. 

j) Coordinate with County officials in response and recovery efforts. 

k) Coordinate and conduct information sharing activities to identify potential and enacted WMD or 
terrorism activities, and mobilize and direct resources in response to such incidents. 

l) Prepares and maintains an emergency plan for the municipality subject to the direction of the 
elected officials; reviews and updates as required. 

m) Develops and maintains a Rained staff and current emergency response checklists appropriate for 
tlie emergency needs and resources of the community. 

n) Coordinate with State and federal officials in collecting and sharing terrorism related information. 


The executive official(s) has reviewed and approves the assigned guidelines. These will be maintained 
in acdSrdance to the most current standards of the county’s emergency plan. 







9 


ATTACHMENT B 


FIRE SERVICES 


The Fire Department, is responsible for fire service actitivites. The following guidelines represent a 
checklist of actions that department officials must consider for providing an effective response to an 
emergency or disaster situation. In addition, the Chief of Fire, or his designee, is to serve as the Citys 
Emergency Management Liason. 


a) Provide command level representatives to the EOC and Unified Incident Command Post, when 
activated. 

b) Coordinates fire, and search and rescue services with appropriate personnel at the County 
Emergency Management Agency; including assistance to regional specialty teams such as, but not 
limited to, the Regional Response Team, MUSAR, and the Bomb Squad. 

c) Coordinates with County EMC and the State of Michigan in the decontamination and monitoring 
of affected citizens and emergency workers after exposure to CBRNE hazards. 

d) Assists with emergency alerting and notification of threatened population. 

e) Assists with evacuation of affected citizens, especially those who are institutionalized, immobilized 

f) Provides resources for fire services response and rescue operations. 

g) Assists in salvage operations and debris clearance. 

h) Advises elected officials about fire and rescue activities. 

i) Conduct safety analysis of the emergency , inform and recommend corrections to the CEO. 

j) Respond to hazardous materials spills in accordance to the procedures in Appendix 1 . 

k) Assist in search and rescue operations. 

l) Assist in searching for bombs and/or explosive devices in connection with WMD events. 

a) Maintain a daily log of expenditures for possible reimbursement from state or federal agencies. 


Chief of Fire, David Cox Jr., has reviewed and approves the assigned guidelines. These will be 



10 


ATTACHMENT B: 

APPENDIX 1: 

FIRE SERVICES 

HAZMAT RESPONSE GUIDELINES 


The Fire Department is responsible for the response to hazardous materials spills. However, through a 
Memorandum of Understanding, the Genesee County Hazmat Team, will respond and assume a 
supportive role. In the event Genesee County’s team is unavailable, a mutual aid request can be made 
of Oakland County’s Hazmat Team or Region 3 Regional Response Team Network. Private companies 
are an option as well. Until a Hazmat team responds, the Fire Department’s response will be acted in 
accordance to the following procedures. 

a) Assume incident command upon arrival at the scene. 

b) Establish scene security or coordinate with other available agencies to establish scene security. 

c) Monitor and evaluate environmental health risks or hazards from hazardous materials releases. 

d) Inspect possible sources of contamination. 

e) Provide technical assistance and liaison with other appropriate agencies or organizations for the 
remediation of hazardous waste releases and other contamination sources. 

f) Disseminate information to the Emergency Operations Center Public Information Officer on 
hazardous material releases issues, 

g) Makes protective action recommendations based on severity and complexity of incident type. 

h) Ensure PPE is fit tested to responders. 

i) Prior to preceding with cleanup, analyze and evaluate the contamination and safety factors of the 
spill by a certified Safety Officer/technician. 

j) Decontaminate equipment and gear. 


Chief of Fire, David Cox Jr., has reviewed and approves the assigned guidelines. These will be 
maintained in accordttnce/lo the most current standards of the county’s emergency plan. 





Signature 


Date 


11 


ATTACHMENT C 


LAW ENFORCEMENT 


The Police Department, is responsible for law enforcement actitivites. The following guidelines 
represent a checklist of actions that department officials must consider for providing an effective 
response to an emergency or disaster situation. 


a) Develops and maintains procedures for the Police Department. 

b) Coordinates security and law enforcement services; with appropriate personnel at the County 
Emergency Operations Center, 

c) Establishes security and protection of critical infrastructure and facilities. 

d) Provides traffic and access control in and around affected areas. 

e) Assists with emergency alerting and notification of threatened population, 

f) Assists with the evacuation of affected citizens, especially those who are institutionalized, 
immobilized or injured. 

g) In cooperation with the Fire Department, performs search and rescue operations. 

h) Implement any curfews ordered by the CEO. 

i) Provides access control to affected areas. 

j) Provide emergency assistance to persons with special/functional needs. 

k) Investigate incident and provide intelligence information to state and federal officials. 

l) Mitigates situations involving explosives through the department’s Bomb Squad. Additional 
resources can be obtained through the Michigan State Police Bomb Squad or the ATF 

m) Maintain a daily log of expenditures for possible reimbursement from state or federal agencies. 

n) Designate a representative for the Emergency Operations Center. 


Chief of Police, James Tolbert, has reviewed and approves the assigned responsibilities. These 
responsibilities will be maintained in accordance to the most current standards of the county’s 



12 



ATTACHMENT D 


WARNING AND COMMUNICATIONS 


The Genesee County 911 (GCCD) is responsible for warning and communications actitivites. The 
following guidelines represent a checklist of actions that department officials must perform in order to 
provide an effective response to an emergency or disaster situation. 


a) Genesee County 91 1 will warn the Emergency Management Liason as well as the Police and Fire 
Departments. The Emergency Management Liason will then direct Genesee County 911 to contact 
the following as he/she deems necessary: 

• Chief Executive Official 

• Emergency Operations Center Representatives 

• Genesee County Emergency Coordinator 

• Surrounding communities or agencies that may be needed for mutual aid. 

b) Provide the necessary support to maintain communications at the City Emergency Operations 
Center. 

c) Establish communications with the county Emergency Operations Center if activated. The 
communications equipment available for this link is 800 MHz radios, telephone and cell phones. 

d) Establish communications with the Incident Command Post, if established. 

e) Coordinate with Genesee County to activate appropriate public warning systems (e.g. Emergency 
Alert System, Code Red). Public warning can also be done via television and/or radio by CEO or 
his/her designee. 

f) Activate procedures for notification of special needs population in the area. 

g) Assist contacting and warning special facilities and locations, such as schools, hospitals, nursing 
homes, major industries, institutions, and place of public assembly. 

h) Maintain a daily log of expenditures for possible reimbursement from state or federal agencies. 


Genesee County 911, Dave Ackley has reviewed and approves the assigned responsibilities. These 
responsibilities will be maintained in accordance to the most current standards of the county’s 



13 



ATTACHMENT E: 

APPENDIX 1 

PUBLIC INFORMATION 


The City of Flint Public Information Official is responsible for public information actitivites. The 
following guidelines represent a checklist of actions that the PIO must consider for providing an 
effective response to an emergency or disaster situation. 


a) Function as the sole point of contact for public officials, including Flint City Council and the City 
Clerk, as well as the news media. 

b) Collect information from municipal emergency response agencies located in the emergency 
operations center and other locations. 

c) Prepare news releases to be disseminated to the local media. 

d) Conduct press tours of disaster area(s) within the community. 

e) Establish a Public Infonnation Center to become the central point from which news releases are 
issued. 

f) Establish and maintain contact with the County Public Information Official if the County’s 
Emergency Operations Plan is activated. 

g) Coordinate public infonnation activities with the county Public Information Officer if the County 
Emergency Operations Center is activated. 

h) Assist the county in establishing a joint information center (JIC). 

i) Assist the county with establishing a Rumor Control Center. 

j) Assist the municipal emergency management liaison in developing and distributing education 
material on the hazards that face the municipality. 

k) Develop and maintain Emergency/Public Infonnation procedures. 

l) Maintain a log and file of all infonnation released to the media. 

m) Manage Social Media outlets. 

n) Respond to EOC when requested. 

n) Maintain a daily log of expenditures for possible reimbursement from state or federal agencies. 


Public Information Official, Appointee, Sean Kammer, has reviewed and approves the assigned 
responsibilities. These responsibilities will be maintained in accordance to the most current standards 
of the county’s emergencyplan. 





Signature 


Date 


14 


ATTACHMENT E: 
APPENDIX 1 


PUBLIC INFORMATION: 
CITY COUNCIL 


Flint City Council members will play a crucial role in disseminating information to their constituents. 
Invariably, they will be inundated with calls during an emergency. The following guidelines represent 
a checklist of actions that the Public Information Official should consider in order to provide an 
effective communication plan with Council members. 


a) In conjunction with City Council, develop procedure for the initial notification of an 
emergency. This should include a specific Council member and his/her contact information, as 
well as second and third alternate Council members. This Councilperson shall then notify all 
other Council members. 

b) Provide written status reports to the Council. This should be done as often as necessary in order 
to keep the Council updated on the current status of the incident. 

c) Establish an avenue of communication, to the EOC, that allows Council members to provide 
information and/or ask questions that have been presented to them by their constituents, 

d) Relay instructions/orders for the public, originating out of the EOC, to the Council so they can, 
in turn, relay them to citizens. This information should be presented to the Council in written 
form. 


The Public Information Official, Sean Kammer, has reviewed and approves the assigned 
responsibilities. These responsibilities will be maintained in accordance to the most current standards 
of the county’s emerdbncy plan. 







Signature 


15 


ATTACHMENT F 


DAMAGE ASSESSMENT 


The Assessor’s Office, is responsible for damage assessment actitivites. The following guidelines 
represent a checklist of actions that department officials must consider for providing an effective 
response to an emergency or disaster situation. 


a) Record initial information from first responders such as law enforcement, fire services, and public 
works. 

b) If necessary, activate a damage assessment field teams via departmental protocol. 

c) Provide information to the municipal Emergency Management Liaison. The Liaison will then 
provide assessment data to the county for preparation of a jurisdictional damage report. 

d) If the situation warrants, assist the municipal CEO with the preparation of a local state of 
emergency declaration and forward to the County Emergency Management Coordinator. 

e) Prepare a request for county assistance in conjunction with the municipal Emergency Management 
Liaison. 

-f)~- .Plot- damage- assessment- information-on- status boards in the- municipal -Emergency -Operations. 

Center. 

g) Record all expenditures for municipal personnel, equipment, supplies, services, etc., and track 
resources being used. 

h) Prepare reports for the municipal public information official. 

i) Coordinate with County Damage Assessment Office (Equalization Director) in large events that 
involve County activation. 

j) Fill out required forms in EMD-PUB 901 Damage Assessment Handbook and forward to County 
Damage Assessment Officer. 

k) Designate a representative for the Emergency Operations Center. 


The City Assessor, William E. Fowler, has reviewed and approves the assigned responsibilities. These 
responsibilities will be maintained in accordance to the most current standards of the county’s 
emergency plan. 



ATTACHMENT G 


PUBLIC WORKS 

The Department of Public Works (DPW) is responsible for maintaining, preserving and/or restoring 
the Citys public services. The following guidelines represent a checklist of actions that department 
officials must consider for providing an effective response to an emergency or disaster situation. 

a) Assess resources that are available at the time of the incident. 

b) If necessary, coordinate activities designed to control the flow of flood water, including 
sandbagging, emergency diking, and pumping operations. 

c) Coordinate travel restrictions/road closures within the municipality. 

d) Identify evacuation routes. 

e) Provide emergency generators and lighting. 

f) Maintain transportation routes and assist with traffic control. 

g) Assist with access control. 

h) Assist with urban search and rescue activities, i.e., persons trapped in damaged buildings or under 
heavy debris/objects. 

i) Assist private utilities with the shutdown and restoration of gas and electric services. 

j) Assist with transportation of essential goods, i.e., food, medical supplies. 

k) As necessary, establish a staging area for public works, 

l) Report damage information to the Damage Assessment Team. 

m) If necessary, assist with damage surveys for the federal public assistance grant program. 

n) If the county Emergency Operations Center is activated, establish and maintain contact with the 
person representing public works. 

o) Notify Law Enforcement of the loeation(s) of disabled vehicles. 

p) Inspect critical infrastructure and other public utilities for safety. This should be done in 
conjunction with the City’s Building Safety Department. 

q) Maintain a daily log of expenditures for possible reimbursement from state or federal agencies. 

r) Assist the Fire Department in response efforts to hazmat incidents. 


Public Works Director, Kay Muhammad, has reviewed and approves the assigned responsibilities. 
These responsibilities will be maintained in accordance to the most current standards of the county’s 
emergency plan. 





C- 



Signature 


1 S-| j_L| IS 

Date 


17 


ATTACHMENT H 


EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES 

The Flint Fire Department EMS Supervisor is responsible for emergency medical service actitivites. 
He/She shall oversee the implementation of the Genesee County Medicai Control Authority (GCMCA) 
Mass Casualty Incident Protocol should it be necessary. The following points represent a checklist of 
actions that agency officials must consider for providing an effective response to an emergency or 
disaster situation. 


a) Assist evacuating nursing homes, hospitals, and other medical facilities. 

b) Assist with decontamination. 

c) Coordinate emergency medical care to victims. 

d) Identify a facility to be used as a temporary morgue if necessary. 

e) Coordinate with hospitals and shelter managers to staff medical teams at shelters. 

f) When appropriate, coordinate field units’ participation in damage assessment activities. 

g) Ensure that emergency medical teams responding on-scene have established an on-scene medical 
command post and a medical commander. 

h) Maintain a daily log of expenditures for possible reimbursement from state or federal agencies. 

i) Designate a representative for the Emergency Operations Center. 


EMS Supervisor, Carrie Edwards-Clemons, has reviewed and approves the assigned responsibilities. 
These responsibilities will be maintained in accordance to the most current standards of the county’s 
emergency plan. 






Signature 


Date 


18 



ATTACHMENT 1 


HUMAN SERVICES 


The Emergency Management Liaison, or his designee, will serve as the Human Services Liaison and 
will be responsible for human services activities. The liaison will coordinate and/or keep informed 
human services activities occuring within the city, with Genesee County Departments of Human 
Services (GCDHS). The following points represent a checklist of actions that the liaison must consider 
for providing an effective response to an emergency or disaster situation. 


a) Coordinate all human services activities through the County Emergency Manager. 

b) Coordinate the provision of transportation for evacuation. Mass Transportation Authority (MTA) 
will be a resource for this task. 

c) Open and manage shelters in the municipality. The American Red Cross (ARC) will be a resource 
for this task. 

d) Set up canteen to feed emergency workers in the municipality'. ARC will be a resource for this task. 

e) Provide food and clothing to municipality workers and victims of disaster residing in the 

mjmicipafity,. _ _ 

f) Assist the county and the City PIO, with establishing a Rumor Control Center. 

g) Arrange for provision of Crisis Counseling or Critical Incident Stress Debriefing (CISD) for both 
victims and identified disaster workers. 

h) If the County Emergency Operations Center is activated, establish and maintain contact with the 
person representing Human Services. If the county Emergency Operations Center is not activated, 
establish and maintain contact with the county Human Services Official directly at the county 
Department of Human Services, 

i) Coordinate with ARC and other pertinent organizations for the distribution of emergency clothing 
for disaster victims. 

j) Coordinate efforts to provide transportation for disaster victims. Consider local school buses or 
MTA. 

k) Coordinate animal and pet control. Genesee County Animal Control will be a resource for this task. 

l) Implementation of a family reunification system. ARC will be a resource for this task. 

m) Maintain a daily log of expenditures for possible reimbursement from state or federal agencies. 


These responsibilities will be maintained in accordance to the most current standards of the county’s 



19 


ATTACHMENT I: 

APPENDIX 1 

HUMAN SERIVCES: 
RESOURCES AND SUPPORT SERVICES 


AGENCY 

CONTACT # 

ALTERNATE #(S) 

Genessee County Emergency 
Manager 

Jenifier Boyer 
810.223.5252 


Mass Transportation Authority -Flint 

Manager of Operations 
Derek Williams 
810.293.0645 

Chris Schoemann 
810.931.4609 

American Red Cross -Flint 

Disaster ActionTeam Member 
810.620.7875 


United Way of Genesee County 

Jamie Gaskin 
810.762.0855 


Resourcre Genesee 

Lindsey Younger 
810.232.6253 


Salvation Army 

Major Jon Augenstein 
810.730.6559 

Major Tim Parker 
810.259.5417 

Genesee County Animal Control 

Director Stepheni Lazar 
810.577.1606 



20 























From: 

Leix, Ron (MSP) 

Sent: 

Monday, January 04, 2016 12:55 PM 

To: 

Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Cc: 

Banner, Shanon (MSP) 

Subject: 

RE: My part of the statement 


Hi Meegan, 

A quick overview about what takes place next. 
Thanks, 

Ron 

Ron Leix 

Public information Officer (PiO) 

Emergency Management 

and Homeland Security Division 
Michigan State Police 
4000 Collins Road 
Lansing, Ml 48910 
TX: (5121 336-6464 


"A PROUD tradition of SERVICE through EXCELLENCE, INTEGRITY, and COURTESY" 



• The Michigan State Police, Emergency Management and Homeland Security Division is working with the 

Genesee County Emergency Management Coordinator to gather information about the resources needed for a 
Governor's declaration. 


o The state police has been closely engaged in the situation since the beginning of this crisis, meeting with 
both county and city officials to guide them through the emergency management process. Due to the 
uniqueness of this situation, we have to look at all possible options to help Flint residents. 

• Beginning immediately, we're viewing this as an emergency and are not waiting to get moving on this problem. 
We're working closely with Mayor Weaver and other city and county officials to bring together state, county and 
city agencies and stakeholders to coordinate efforts and streamline communication. 


From: Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, January 04, 2016 11:52 AM 



To: Leix, Ron (MSP) 

Subject: My part of the statement 

Ron - quick overview of next steps and then.... 

But we aren't waiting for a declaration. We're viewing this as an emergency, regardless of whether it meets any legal 
definition. We believe we must not wait to get moving on this problem. We're working closely with Mayor Weaver and 
other city and county officials to bring together state, county and city agencies and stakeholders to coordinate efforts 
and streamline communication. 

Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 
Twitter: @meholland 






From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Leix, Ron (MSP) 

Monday, January 04, 2016 12:58 PM 
Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

RE: My part of the statement 

Fact Sheet - Emergency or Disaster Declaration Process.pdf 


Sorry for the delay, Here's a fact sheet that goes through the process too. 
--Ron 


From: Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, January 04, 2016 12:56 PM 
To: Leix, Ron (MSP) 

Subject: RE: My part of the statement 


Thanks - I'll put it all together with Dave M/s help and will get back to you! 
Meegan 


From: Leix, Ron (MSP) 

Sent: Monday, January 04, 2016 12:55 PM 
To: Holland, Meegan (GOV) <HoiiandM2@mich jgan.gov > 
Cc: Banner, Shanon (MSP) <BannerS@michlgan.gov> 
Subject: RE: My part of the statement 

Hi Meegan, 

A quick overview about what takes place next. 

Thanks, 

Ron 

Ron Leix 

Public Information Officer (P10) 

Emergency Management 

and Homeland Security Division 
Michigan State Police 
4000 Collins Road 
Lansing, Ml 48910 
TX: (517) 336-6464 



"A PROUD tradition of SERVICE through EXCELLENCE, INTEGRITY, and COURTESY" 



l 



The Michigan State Police, Emergency Management and Homeland Security Division is working with the 
Genesee County Emergency Management Coordinator to gather information about the resources needed for a 
Governor's declaration. 


o The state police has been closely engaged in the situation since the beginning of this crisis, meeting with 
both county and city officials to guide them through the emergency management process. Due to the 
uniqueness of this situation, we have to look at all possible options to help Flint residents. 

• Beginning immediately, we're viewing this as an emergency and are not waiting to get moving on this problem. 
We're working closely with Mayor Weaver and other city and county officials to bring together state, county and 
city agencies and stakeholders to coordinate efforts and streamline communication. 


From: Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, January 04, 2016 11:52 AM 
To: Leix, Ron (MSP) 

Subject: My part of the statement 

Ron - quick overview of next steps and then.... 

But we aren't waiting for a declaration. We're viewing this as an emergency, regardless of whether it meets any legal 
definition. We believe we must not wait to get moving on this problem. We're working closely with Mayor Weaver and 
other city and county officials to bring together state, county and city agencies and stakeholders to coordinate efforts 
and streamline communication. 

Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 
Office: 517-335-6397 



Twitter: @meholland 


2 



December 2014 



The Michigan Emergency Management Act (Public Act 390 of 1976, as amended) outlines the 
emergency management process for the state of Michigan. If an incident exhausts state resources, the 
Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 USC §§ 5121-5207) establishes 
the process for requesting and obtaining a presidential disaster declaration and assistance from the 
federal government. 

STEP BY STEP: Emergency or Disaster Declaration Process 

1 . Disasters are first and foremost local events. Most disasters are handled by local government with 
minimal or no state assistance. At the onset of a disaster or emergency, local emergency 
responders, joined by volunteers and the private sector, are the first to be involved. 

2. A local jurisdiction may declare a “Local State of Emergency” exists when they have sustained 
widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property. A local declaration ensures the 
response and recovery aspects of the emergency operations plan have been activated, and local 
resources are being utilized to the fullest extent possible. Authorities may authorize local aid and 
assistance. 

3. If recovery efforts are beyond the ability of local government, the community may turn to the state to 
request assistance. All requests for assistance are channeled through the Michigan State Police, 
Emergency Management and Homeland Security Division. 

4. The Michigan State Police, Emergency Management and Homeland Security Division reviews 
specific requests for state assistance and makes recommendations to the Governor’s Office. The 
Governor’s authority, granted by the Michigan Emergency Management Act, may include mobilizing 
state government agencies to provide necessary support and assistance to local authorities under a 
“State of Emergency” or “State of Disaster” declaration. 

5. If state and local government resources are unable to cope with the emergency or disaster, the 
Governor may request assistance through the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Region V Office in Chicago. 

6. At the request of the Governor, FEMA may conduct a Preliminary Damage Assessment (PDA) in 
cooperation with state and local emergency management officials. The results of the PDA will be 
reviewed by state officials and the Governor’s Office and used as a basis for determining whether to 
request federal financial assistance. 

7. Should the state request federal disaster assistance, FEMA will review the request and make a 
recommendation to the president, who will make the final determination on any disaster aid to be 
provided to the state. The goal of disaster assistance is not to make individuals, businesses or 
government entities whole again, but to restore the community to a level that meets expected health 
and safety considerations. 







From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Leix, Ron (MSP) 

Monday, January 04, 2016 5:25 PM 
Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

RE: My part of the statement 


I bet it will be! As its stand right now, Shanon or Tiffany wiH be there. 
-Ron 


From: Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, January 04, 2016 1:06 PM 
To: Leix, Ron (MSP) 

Subject: RE: My part of the statement 

Ahhh good ~ this helps! 


Are you coming to the PIO meeting tomorrow at 10:30? i think it'll be pretty interesting. 


From: Leix, Ron (MSP) 

Sent: Monday, January 04, 2016 12:58 PM 

To: Holland, Meegan (GOV) < H oil a n d M 2 @ rn i ch iga n. gov > 

Subject: RE: My part of the statement 


Sorry for the delay. Here's a fact sheet that goes through the process too. 


-Ron 


From: Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, January 04, 2016 12:56 PM 
To: Leix, Ron (MSP) 

Subject: RE: My part of the statement 


Thanks -■ I'll put it all together with Dave M/s help and will get back to you! 


Meegan 


From: Leix, Ron (MSP) 

Sent: Monday, January 04, 2016 12:55 PM 
To: Holland, Meegan (GOV) <H oHandM2@michigan.gov> 
Cc: Banner, Shanon (MSP) < BannerS@michlgan.gov> 
Subject: RE: My part of the statement 

Hi Meegan, 

A quick overview about what takes place next. 

Thanks, 

Ron 


l 



Ron Leix 

Public Information Officer (PIO) 
Emergency Management 

and Homeland Security Division 
Michigan State Police 
4000 Collins Road 
Lansing, Ml 48910 
TX: {517} 336-6464 



"A PROUD tradition of SERVICE through EXCELLENCE, INTEGRITY, and COURTESY" 



• The Michigan State Police, Emergency Management and Homeland Security Division is working with the 
Genesee County Emergency Management Coordinator to gather information about the resources needed for a 
Governor's declaration. 

o The state police has been closely engaged in the situation since the beginning of this crisis, meeting with 
both county and city officials to guide them through the emergency management process. Due to the 
uniqueness of this situation, we have to look at all possible options to help Flint residents. 

• Beginning immediately, we're viewing this as an emergency and are not waiting to get moving on this problem. 
We're working closely with Mayor Weaver and other city and county officials to bring together state, county and 
city agencies and stakeholders to coordinate efforts and streamline communication. 


From: Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, January 04, 2016 11:52 AM 
To: Leix, Ron (MSP) 

Subject: My part of the statement 

Ron - quick overview of next steps and then.... 

But we aren't waiting for a declaration. We're viewing this as an emergency, regardless of whether it meets any legal 
definition. We believe we must not wait to get moving on this problem. We're working closely with Mayor Weaver and 
other city and county officials to bring together state, county and city agencies and stakeholders to coordinate efforts 
and streamline communication. 

Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 
Office: 517-335-6397 



Twitter: @meholland 


2 






From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Murray, David (GOV) 

Tuesday, January 05, 2016 9:22 AM 
Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

FW: Comment sought on Flint Water ASAP 


Dave Murray 

Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 
lyiynayDl^mjcn 
si7-33s-fi3q7 office 
mobile 

Twitter:@michigandmurray 




From: Gary Ridley [ m a i 1 to : G R I D LEY# m live . com 1 

Sent: Tuesday, January 05, 2016 9:22 AM 
To: Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: Comment sought on Flint Water ASAP 

Dave, 

I just got a confirmation from the U.S. Attorney's Office that it is investigating the Flint water situation. It isn't releasing 
specifics, but I wanted to give you a chance to respond to this news. 

I am typing up something right now and will be posting ASAP. 

Thanks. 


Gary Ridley | The Flint Journal-MLive Media Group | 810 - 280-9516 | 


l 



To: 

Subject: 


Calley, Brian (GOV) 

RE: BRIEFING: Auditor General answers on Flint water situation 


Governor Calley, 

I’ve made a note to check on Monday about the OAG release. 

And I like your summary of the three points we need to convey. It won’t change the 
coverage by the Freep, Rachel Maddow or Michigan Radio, but it will humanize Gov. 
Snyder in the eyes of many who are wondering if we have anything to hide. 

Regards, 

Meegan 

From: Calley, Brian (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, December 24, 2015 9:02 AM 

To: Holland, Meegan (GOV) <HollandM2@michigan.gov> 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Baird, Richard (GOV) 
<bairdr@michigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) <hollin sh@michigan.gov>; Walsh, J ohn 
(GOV) <WalshJ@michigan.gov>; Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov>; Scott, Allison (GOV) 

<scotta1 2@michigan.gov> 

Subject: Re: BRIEFING: Auditor General answers on Flint water situation 

We should ask that it be released soon. It's hard to explain why it would not be made 
public just as other actions from the Auditor are. 

On Dec 24, 2015, at 8:38 AM, Holland, Meegan (GOV) <{HYPERLINK 
"mailto:HollandM2@michigan.gov"}> wrote: 

It was provided to Sen. Ananich at close of business day yesterday. We’re waiting to 
see what Sen. Ananich does with the letter. I don’t know if the Auditor General will 
actually release it, since it was a response to Sen. Ananich’s questions. 

Regards, 

Meegan 

From: Calley, Brian (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, December 24, 2015 8:36 AM 

To: Holland, Meegan (GOV) <{HYPERLINK "mailto:HollandM2@michigan.gov"}> 
Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <{HYPERLINK "mailto:AgenJ@michigan.gov"}>; Baird, 
Richard (GOV) <{HYPERLINK "mailto:bairdr@michigan.gov"}>; Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) <{HYPERLINK "mailto:hollinsh@michigan.gov"}>; Walsh, John (GOV) 
<{HYPERLINK "mailto:WalshJ@michigan.gov"}>; Snyder, Rick (GOV) 
<{HYPERLINK"mailto^^^^^^^^^H"}>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
<{HYPERLINK "mailto:clemente@michigan.gov"}>; Scott, Allison (GOV) 
<{HYPERLINK "mailto:scotta12@michigan.gov"}> 

Subject: Re: BRIEFING: Auditor General answers on Flint water situation 


Great summary. Thank you. 

Is this on publicly released yet? 

On Dec 24, 2015, at 8:07 AM, Holland, Meegan (GOV) <{HYPERLINK 
"mailto:HollandM2@michigan.gov"}> wrote: 

Colleagues: 

Here is a summary of answers from the Office of the Auditor General in response 
to questions mostly posed by Sen. Jim Ananich’s office (the auditor added a few 
questions in the 1 1 -page report). The questions came as the OAG conducts an 
audit of the Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance’s handling of the 
Flint water crisis. 

Conclusions: 

While the City Council voted in March 2013 to move to the KWA pipeline, it didn’t 
designate the Flint River as an interim water source. But the DEQ had approved 
the river as a backup source for emergency purposes in 2006. The treated water 
met safety standards in quarterly tests by the Flint WTP, but Flint had never 
tested its effect on the distribution system. 

In an email review of key DEQ managers to determine if there was an effort to 
conceal information, only one email exchange raised red flags. The EPA had 
asked DEQ in February 2015 if Flint had a corrosion control program; the DEQ 
responded the city had an optimized program in place. But in April the EPA 
asked again, and the DEQ said that the Flint Water Treatment Plant (WTP) was 
not doing corrosion control. DEQ later explained that its first response referred to 
its program to monitor a new water source (in this case, the Flint river) 
for lead/copper for two consecutive six-month periods to determine optimal 
corrosion treatment. The report says there’s no reason to believe that DEQ 
willfully misrepresented information to the EPA. It also concludes that ODWMA 
employees appeared to have notified management properly about the unfolding 
Flint water situation. 

DEQ did not consult with the EPA on how best to apply the Lead and Copper 
Rule (LCR) monitoring practices after the switch to Flint water, but from past 
experience, DEQ believed it was doing so correctly by doing two rounds of 
six-month monitoring on the new water source before determining optimal 
corrosion control. The EPA disagreed with DEQ’s interpretation of the LCR, but 
later stated that the LCR was open to interpretation. It then clarified the rule; the 
upshot: corrosion controls already in place when Flint was on Detroit water 
should have been maintained after the switch. 

DEQ should have notified the Flint WTP to start corrosion controls once the first 
round of six-month sampling results arrived in late March 2015 and showed the 
water exceeded acceptable lead levels. 

DEQ doesn’t oversee the Flint WTP so it doesn’t have any accountability 
measures to ensure the WTP is collecting water samples from tier 1 homes, i.e., 
residences with lead service lines, soldering or plumbing. Instead, DEQ relies on 
Flint’s certification of sample sites. The auditor suggests DEQ should consider an 



independent verification of the sampling pool or Flint’s certifications. In November 
201 5, Flint admitted that it had no way to ensure the sites were all tier 1 . Water 
samples came from 175 randomly distributed testing bottles. DEQ has asked 
Flint to verify its prior samples by this Wednesday (12/30). 

There’s been controversy that DEQ dropped two sampling sites with high lead 
levels from its second six-month review. It was appropriate for DEQ to do so 
because those sites did not meet federal criteria. It was also appropriate for DEQ 
to require flushing taps the night before sampling to ensure faucets didn’t contain 
overly stagnant water. 

Charts show that most water samples were taken in the sixth month of the 
six-month testing period. The report said it’s tough to determine if the lateness of 
the sampling affects the accuracy. 

The report ends with an excellent timeline. I have attached the report in case you 
want to review the timeline on page 1 1 . 

Meegan Flolland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 

Office: 51^3^397 

Mobile: 

Twitter: @meholland 

<Auditor General Letter - City of Flint Drinking Water (002).pdf> 



To: 


CC: 

Subject: 


Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, 
Harvey (GOV); Kelenske, Chris (MSP); Murray, David (GOV); Redford, James 
(GOV); Becker, Timothy (DHHS); Creagh, Keith (DNR); Roberts, John (DTMB) 
Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 

RE: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 


From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 6:57 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
<clemente@michigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) <hollinsh@michigan.gov>; 

Kelenske, Chris (MSP) <KelenskeC@michigan.gov>; Holland, Meegan (GOV) 
<HollandM2@michigan.gov>; Murray, David (GOV) <MurrayD1@michigan.gov>; 
Redford, James (GOV) <RedfordJ@michigan.gov>; Becker, Timothy (DHHS) 
<beckert1@michigan.gov>; Creagh, Keith (DNR) <creaghk@michigan.gov>; Roberts, 
John (DTMB) <RobertsJ9@michigan.gov> 

Cc: Etue, Kriste (MSP) <EtueK@michigan.gov>; Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 
<LyonN2@michigan.gov> 

Subject: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 
Team: 

Today Harvey and I met with the Flint Water Task Force. It was a good 
meeting. People were pleased with the G’s statement from the prior day. Captain 
Kelenske joined us and we had a very good discussion about moving forward with the 
creation of the Flint Water Crisis Agency Coordinating Committee (FIACC). Tim Becker 
and Captain Kelenske provided me with a fair amount of input. I also read the City of 
Flint Incident Action Plan for a State of Emergency which Chris received today 
(enclosed for those who wish to read it as well). I have distilled all of this into a two 
page plan that I want your edits and comments on and a one page organizational chart 
(now presented in the “governor’s colors” according to our fine people in 
Communications). Spoiler alert — I made Captain Kelenske Vice Chair of the whole 
shebang (with the Colonel’s blessing) so Harvey wouldn’t get lonely. 

Here is my ask of you: 

1 ) Within 24 (sooner if you can) hours give me your comments and input 

2) Tomorrow I will turn around a final document for Jarrod to review with the 
Governor either New Year’s Day or Saturday 

3) Ideally, Governor will approve Harvey sending it to Mayor Weaver Saturday 
(Sunday latest) 

4) Mayor needs to know that this is what the Governor wishes to discuss at the 
meeting January 7 along with financial resources that we still need some estimates on 
cost from DHHS for 

5) Meegan and Dave need to noodle how best to get out front with this and change 



the narrative focus on Monday’s Genesee County declaration of emergency 
I know we are all working way too hard for what should be a rest and recharge period 
but I do appreciate everyone’s efforts and I know the Boss really does as well. 

Regards, 

Rich 



To: Becker, Timothy (DHHS); Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, 

Elizabeth (GO V); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Kelenske, Chris (MSP); Murray, David 
(GO V); Redford, James (GOV); Creagh, Keith (DNR); Roberts, John (DTMB) 

CC: Etue, Kriste (MSP); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 

Subject: RE: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 

Thanks for sharing that plan, Tim! 

Happy New Year everyone ... and Go Green! 

Meegan 

From: Becker, Timothy (DHHS) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 11:35 PM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV) <bairdr@michigan.gov>; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

<AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov>; 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV) <hollinsh@michigan.gov>; Kelenske, Chris (MSP) 
<KelenskeC@michigan.gov>; Holland, Meegan (GOV) <HollandM2@michigan.gov>; 
Murray, David (GOV) <MurrayD1@michigan.gov>; Redford, James (GOV) 
<RedfordJ@michigan.gov>; Creagh, Keith (DNR) <creaghk@michigan.gov>; Roberts, 
John (DTMB) <RobertsJ9@michigan.gov> 

Cc: Etue, Kriste (MSP) <EtueK@michigan.gov>; Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 
<LyonN2@michigan.gov> 

Subject: RE: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 

Attached is a supplemental MDHHS advanced to SBO today (John: Farah sent to 
Nancy, Harkins, and team). This addresses surveillance, case management, and lead 
abatement in homes including pipes. It does not yet establish the long-term “health 
fund” some have advocated for. On the proposal document I concur with Director 
Creagh’s and Mr. Redford’s suggestions on a slight re-wording of statement of need. I 
am comfortable with the general framework of the group. I agree with Captain 
Kelenske that the state needs to lead the group. I think with the Executive and MSP 
chairing the state is providing the requested prospective leadership. We have built in 
extensive participation from city, county, and subject matter experts and we will be 
completely transparent with all partners. 

From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 6:57 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <{HYPERLINK "mailto:AgenJ@michigan.gov"}>; Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV) <{HYPERLINK "mailto:clemente@michigan.gov"}>; Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) <{HYPERLINK "mailto:hollinsh@michigan.gov"}>; Kelenske, Chris (MSP) 
<{HYPERLINK "mailto:KelenskeC@michigan.gov"}>; Holland, Meegan (GOV) 
<{HYPERLINK "mailto:HollandM2@michigan.gov"}>; Murray, David (GOV) 
<{HYPERLINK "mailto:MurrayD1@michigan.gov"}>; Redford, James (GOV) 
<{HYPERLINK "mailto:RedfordJ@michigan.gov"}>; Becker, Timothy (DHHS) 
<{HYPERLINK "mailto:beckert1@michigan.gov"}>; Creagh, Keith (DNR) <{HYPERLINK 
"mailto:creaghk@michigan.gov"}>; Roberts, John (DTMB) <{HYPERLINK 
"mailto:RobertsJ9@michigan.gov"}> 



Cc: Etue, Kriste (MSP) <{HYPERLINK "mailto:EtueK@michigan.gov"}>; Lyon, Nick 
(DHHS) <{HYPERLINK "mailto:LyonN2@michigan.gov"}> 

Subject: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 

Team: 

Today Harvey and I met with the Flint Water Task Force. It was a good 
meeting. People were pleased with the G’s statement from the prior day. Captain 
Kelenske joined us and we had a very good discussion about moving forward with the 
creation of the Flint Water Crisis Agency Coordinating Committee (FIACC). Tim Becker 
and Captain Kelenske provided me with a fair amount of input. I also read the City of 
Flint Incident Action Plan for a State of Emergency which Chris received today 
(enclosed for those who wish to read it as well). I have distilled all of this into a two 
page plan that I want your edits and comments on and a one page organizational chart 
(now presented in the “governor’s colors” according to our fine people in 
Communications). Spoiler alert — I made Captain Kelenske Vice Chair of the whole 
shebang (with the Colonel’s blessing) so Harvey wouldn’t get lonely. 

Here is my ask of you: 

1 ) Within 24 (sooner if you can) hours give me your comments and input 

2) Tomorrow I will turn around a final document for Jarrod to review with the 
Governor either New Year’s Day or Saturday 

3) Ideally, Governor will approve Harvey sending it to Mayor Weaver Saturday 
(Sunday latest) 

4) Mayor needs to know that this is what the Governor wishes to discuss at the 
meeting January 7 along with financial resources that we still need some estimates on 
cost from DHHS for 

5) Meegan and Dave need to noodle how best to get out front with this and change 
the narrative focus on Monday’s Genesee County declaration of emergency 

I know we are all working way too hard for what should be a rest and recharge period 
but I do appreciate everyone’s efforts and I know the Boss really does as well. 

Regards, 


Rich 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 22, 2015 4:52 PM 
Baird, Richard (GOV) 

RE: Meeting with Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha and Flint Water 


Thanks for keeping us in the loop, Rich. 

It's immensely helpful to Dave and me to know what lies ahead so we can craft our message accordingly. 

Also, thanks for that lovely bottle of wine. I hope you and Linda have a wonderful holiday ... and I also hope I don't have 
to bug you during your time off, but I'm not going to guarantee it! 

- Meegan 

Original Message 

From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 22, 2015 4:27 PM 

To: Holland, Meegan (GOV) < HoilandM2@michig3n.gov >: Murray, David (GOV) < Murr3yDl@michigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: Meeting with Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha and Flint Water 

These are all the areas where long term vigilance needs to be happening. 

Original Message 

From: Mona Hanna-Attisha [mailto:MHannal@hurleymc.corn] 

Sent: Tuesday, December 15, 2015 7:40 AM 
To: Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 

Cc: Baird, Richard (GOV); Laurence Reynolds; Matthew M. Davis; Chris Kolb; Ken Sikkema; Chris De Witt; Eric Rothstein; 
Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: RE: Meeting with Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha and Flint Water 
attached 

Original Message 

From: Lyon, Nick (DHHS) [mailto:i.yonN2 @ michi g an.govl 

Sent: Tuesday, December 15, 2015 6:26 AM 
To: Mona Hanna-Attisha 

Cc: Baird, Richard (GOV); Laurence Reynolds; Matthew M. Davis; Chris Kolb; Ken Sikkema; Chris De Witt; Eric Rothstein; 
Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: Re: Meeting with Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha and Flint Water 

Thank you for the presentation and your approach to this. When you can please share a version of the presentation I can 
pass in to Sue, Eden and the others in my Population Health area. 

Nick 


> On Dec 14, 2015, at 7:05 PM, Mona Hanna-Attisha <MHannal@hurlevmc.com> wrote: 


1 



> 

> 

> Mr. Baird and all the other guys, 

> 

> It was a pleasure meeting everyone and a privilege to present to you all. As I said, we have an incredible and unique 
opportunity to mitigate the impact of this population-wide exposure. If we act now, proactively, we can buffer our kids 
from the life-altering impacts of lead poisoning. 

> 

> Flint has many claims to fame (we put the world on wheels, we birthed Mr. Baird!, etc); and now, with your leadership, 
we can continue to build generations of strong, smart, and healthy children. 

> 

> If I can be of any further assistance, please don't hesitate to contact me. Email or cell 

> 

> Thanks again, Mona 

> 

> Mona Hanna-Attisha MD MPH FAAP 

> Program Director Pediatric Residency 

> Plurley Children's Hospital at Plurley Medical Center Michigan State 

> University College of Pluman Medicine Department of Pediatrics and 

> Pluman Development Mhannal@hurleymc.com<maiito:Mhannal(g | hurievmc.com > 

> 

> From: Baird, Richard (GOV) [bairdr@michigan.gov] 

> Sent: Thursday, December 10, 2015 2:27 PM 

> Required: Baird, Richard (GOV); Laurence Reynolds; Matthew M. Davis; 

> Chris Kolb; Ken Sikkema; Chris De Witt; 'Eric Rothstein'; Lyon, Nick 

> (DHHS); Grijalva, Nancy (DHHS); Mona Hanna-Attisha 

> Subject: Meeting with Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha and Flint Water 

> When: Monday, December 14, 2015 11:00 AM-12:00 PM. 

> Where: Governor's Conference Room, 2nd Floor Romney Building, 111 S. 

> Capitol Ave., Lansing, Ml 48933 

> 

> Good Morning, 

> 

> This is to confirm the meeting with Rich Baird on Monday, December 14 at 11:00 a.m. in the Governor's Conference 
room, second floor Romney Building, 111 S. Capitol Ave. Lansing, Ml 48933. 

> 

> We are located at the George W. Romney Building, 111 S. Capitol 

> Avenue, Lansing. The Romney Building is located directly across the 

> street (Capitol Avenue) from the Capitol Building. There is some 

> metered parking around the building. The closest parking facility is 

> one block south at the corner of Capitol Avenue and Allegan Street 

> (enter the parking facility from Capitol Avenue). 

> https://www.parkme.com/iot/93032/tower-parking-r3mp-iansing-nii 

> 

> You will also want to have a picture I.D. handy for security in the Romney Building. Please let security know who you 
have a meeting with, they will call me and then send you up to the second floor. 

> 

> Please let me know if you have any questions. 

> 

> Thank you! 

> 

> Virginia Manolakoudis 



2 



> Executive Assistant for Richard Baird 

> Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

> (517) 241-5621 



> 

> 

> 

> 

> 

> 

> 

> <#flintwatercrisis Secondary Prevention Recommendations 121415. pdf> 


3 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 22, 2015 4:52 PM 
Baird, Richard (GOV) 

RE: Meeting with Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha and Flint Water 


Thanks for keeping us in the loop, Rich. 

It's immensely helpful to Dave and me to know what lies ahead so we can craft our message accordingly. 

Also, thanks for that lovely bottle of wine. I hope you and Linda have a wonderful holiday ... and I also hope I don't have 
to bug you during your time off, but I'm not going to guarantee it! 

- Meegan 

Original Message 

From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 22, 2015 4:27 PM 

To: Holland, Meegan (GOV) < HoilandM2@michig3n.gov >: Murray, David (GOV) < Murr3yDl@michigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: Meeting with Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha and Flint Water 

These are all the areas where long term vigilance needs to be happening. 

Original Message 

From: Mona Hanna-Attisha [mailto:MHannal@hurleymc.corn] 

Sent: Tuesday, December 15, 2015 7:40 AM 
To: Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 

Cc: Baird, Richard (GOV); Laurence Reynolds; Matthew M. Davis; Chris Kolb; Ken Sikkema; Chris De Witt; Eric Rothstein; 
Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: RE: Meeting with Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha and Flint Water 
attached 

Original Message 

From: Lyon, Nick (DHHS) [mailto:i.yonN2 @ michi g an.govl 

Sent: Tuesday, December 15, 2015 6:26 AM 
To: Mona Hanna-Attisha 

Cc: Baird, Richard (GOV); Laurence Reynolds; Matthew M. Davis; Chris Kolb; Ken Sikkema; Chris De Witt; Eric Rothstein; 
Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: Re: Meeting with Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha and Flint Water 

Thank you for the presentation and your approach to this. When you can please share a version of the presentation I can 
pass in to Sue, Eden and the others in my Population Health area. 

Nick 


> On Dec 14, 2015, at 7:05 PM, Mona Hanna-Attisha <MHannal@hurlevmc.com> wrote: 


1 



> 

> 

> Mr. Baird and all the other guys, 

> 

> It was a pleasure meeting everyone and a privilege to present to you all. As I said, we have an incredible and unique 
opportunity to mitigate the impact of this population-wide exposure. If we act now, proactively, we can buffer our kids 
from the life-altering impacts of lead poisoning. 

> 

> Flint has many claims to fame (we put the world on wheels, we birthed Mr. Baird!, etc); and now, with your leadership, 
we can continue to build generations of strong, smart, and healthy children. 

> 

> If I can be of any further assistance, please don't hesitate to contact me. Email or cell 

> 

> Thanks again, Mona 

> 

> Mona Hanna-Attisha MD MPH FAAP 

> Program Director Pediatric Residency 

> Hurley Children's Hospital at Hurley Medical Center Michigan State 

> University College of Human Medicine Department of Pediatrics and 

> Human Development Mhannal@hudeymc.com<mailto:Mhannal@hurleymc.com > 

> 

> From: Baird, Richard (GOV) [bairdr@michigan.gov] 

> Sent: Thursday, December 10, 2015 2:27 PM 

> Required: Baird, Richard (GOV); Laurence Reynolds; Matthew M. Davis; 

> Chris Kolb; Ken Sikkema; Chris De Witt; 'Eric Rothstein'; Lyon, Nick 

> (DHHS); Grijalva, Nancy (DHHS); Mona Hanna-Attisha 

> Subject: Meeting with Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha and Flint Water 

> When: Monday, December 14, 2015 11:00 AM-12:00 PM. 

> Where: Governor's Conference Room, 2nd Floor Romney Building, 111 S. 

> Capitol Ave., Lansing, Ml 48933 

> 

> Good Morning, 

> 

> This is to confirm the meeting with Rich Baird on Monday, December 14 at 11:00 a.m. in the Governor's Conference 
room, second floor Romney Building, 111 S. Capitol Ave. Lansing, Ml 48933. 

> 

> We are located at the George W. Romney Building, 111 S. Capitol 

> Avenue, Lansing. The Romney Building is located directly across the 

> street (Capitol Avenue) from the Capitol Building. There is some 

> metered parking around the building. The closest parking facility is 

> one block south at the corner of Capitol Avenue and Allegan Street 

> (enter the parking facility from Capitol Avenue). 

> https://www.parkme.com/iot/93032/tower-parking-ramp-iansinp-nii 

> 

> You will also want to have a picture I.D. handy for security in the Romney Building. Please let security know who you 
have a meeting with, they will call me and then send you up to the second floor. 

> 

> Please let me know if you have any questions. 

> 

> Thank you! 

> 

> Virginia Manolakoudis 


2 



> Executive Assistant for Richard Baird 

> Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

> (517) 241-5621 



> 

> 

> 

> 

> 

> 

> 

> <#flintwatercrisis Secondary Prevention Recommendations 121415. pdf> 


3 



From: Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday^ecembei^2^015 6:33 PM 

To: 'snydei^^^^^^^^^^|Baird, Richard (GOV); 'calley^^^^^^^^^^^Agen, Jarrod 

(GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV) 

Subject: Briefing on Flint water blog post 

Colleagues, 

Here is a quick summary of a hjos gost that appears on flintwaterstudy.org, based on 159 pages of DHHS emails 
requested by Virginia Tech researcher Marc Edwards under the Freedom of Information Act. 

The headline: "Michigan Health Department Hid Evidence of Health Harm Due to Lead Contaminated Water: Allowed 
False Public Assurances by MDEQ and Stonewalled Outside Researchers" 

Major points: 

■ Lee Ann Walters contacted DHHS nurse Karen Lishinski to discuss her child's high lead level. The response: "He 

is barely lead poisoned. If CDC had not changed their lead poisoning standard from 10 down to 5, we would 
not be having this conversation ... I am working with kids in their 40's and 50's. It is just a few IQ points. ..it is 
not the end of the world." 

■ DHHS reached out to DEQ after some red flags about lead levels; Stephen Busch responded with inaccurate 

information. Even so, DHHS proceeded with studies on lead levels and found spiked levels for Q3 2014 and 
2015 (third quarters - the summer months - often have season spikes). July 2015 memos indicate they could 
see something was awry, but the story implies that DHHS sat on the results. 

■ In September 2015, Brad Wurfel said a study was done and he used it to discredit data from Virginia Tech 

showing high lead levels. The blog post says Wurfel misrepresented the DHHS results and that DHHS "stood by 
and said nothing while MDEQ made false claims about, what the blood lead data showed." 

■ Virginia Tech's Marc Edwards requested water data on 9/2/15. He waited for several weeks for the information, 

and the article talks about how the request caused a flurry of emails at DHHS, particularly between Robert 
Scott and Nancy Peeler (who work in the childhood lead prevention program). The story says the emails show 
the department was acting unethically because they appeared to be stonewalling Edwards and later Dr. Mona 
Hanna-Attisha. 

DHHS' response: 

"The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services has been, and continues to be, committed to full disclosure 
of information regarding the city of Flint and blood lead levels. To suggest otherwise is not consistent with how we 
have responded. 

"When initially looking at the citywide and county elevated blood lead level numbers, the increase appeared to be 
consistent with the routine seasonal fluctuation seen in the summer months. It wasn't until the Hurley report came 
out that our epidemiologists took a more in-depth look at the data by zip code, controlling for seasonal variation, and 
confirmed an increase outside of normal trends. As a result of this process, we have determined that the way we 
analyze data collected needs to be thoroughly reviewed. Our after action report will help determine how we conduct 
this process in the future. 

"Our department is focused on ensuring that appropriate case management and follow up is occurring in Flint. 
Summary reports outlining blood lead level testing are posted online on a bi-weekly basis, and we are working closely 
with local partners to fulfill data requests as we receive them. 



"Regarding the FOIA, Mr. Edwards received all of the requested documents, with personal information redacted, on 
Friday, December 18." 

Media response: We have received requests from The Flint Journal, The Detroit Free Press, Michigan Radio, 
Huffington Post, Rachel Maddow and Flint TV. 

If there are any questions, please feel free to ask away. 

Meegan 
Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 

Office: 517-335-6397 

Mobile: 

Twitter: @meholland 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 


Subject: 

Attachments: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Thursday, December 24, 2015 8:08 AM 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV); 
'calleyl^^^^^^^^^^^ snyderr^^^^^^^^^^^Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); 
Scott, Allison (GOV) 

BRIEFING: Auditor General answers on Flint water situation 
Auditor General Letter - City of Flint Drinking Water (002). pdf 


Colleagues: 

Here is a summary of answers from the Office of the Auditor General in response to questions mostly posed by Sen. Jim 
Ananich's office (the auditor added a few questions in the 11-page report). The questions came as the OAG conducts an 
audit of the Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance's handling of the Flint water crisis. 

Conclusions: 

While the City Council voted in March 2013 to move to the KWA pipeline, it didn't designate the Flint River as an interim 
water source. But the DEQ had approved the river as a backup source for emergency purposes in 2006. The treated 
water met safety standards in quarterly tests by the Flint WTP, but Flint had never tested its effect on the distribution 
system. 

In an email review of key DEQ managers to determine if there was an effort to conceal information, only one email 
exchange raised red flags. The EPA had asked DEQ in February 2015 if Flint had a corrosion control program; the DEQ 
responded the city had an optimized program in place. But in April the EPA asked again, and the DEQ said that the Flint 
Water Treatment Plant (WTP) was not doing corrosion control. DEQ later explained that its first response referred to its 
program to monitor a new water source (in this case, the Flint river) for lead/copper for two consecutive six-month 
periods to determine optimal corrosion treatment. The report says there's no reason to believe that DEQ willfully 
misrepresented information to the EPA. It also concludes that ODWMA employees appeared to have notified 
management properly about the unfolding Flint water situation. 

DEQ did not consult with the EPA on how best to apply the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) monitoring practices after the 
switch to Flint water, but from past experience, DEQ believed it was doing so correctly by doing two rounds of six-month 
monitoring on the new water source before determining optimal corrosion control. The EPA disagreed with DEQ's 
interpretation of the LCR, but later stated that the LCR was open to interpretation. It then clarified the rule; the upshot: 
corrosion controls already in place when Flint was on Detroit water should have been maintained after the switch. 

DEQ should have notified the Flint WTP to start corrosion controls once the first round of six-month sampling results 
arrived in late March 2015 and showed the water exceeded acceptable lead levels. 

DEQ doesn't oversee the Flint WTP so it doesn't have any accountability measures to ensure the WTP is collecting water 
samples from tier 1 homes, i.e., residences with lead service lines, soldering or plumbing. Instead, DEQ relies on Flint's 
certification of sample sites. The auditor suggests DEQ should consider an independent verification of the sampling pool 
or Flint's certifications. In November 2015, Flint admitted that it had no way to ensure the sites were all tier 1. Water 
samples came from 175 randomly distributed testing bottles. DEQ has asked Flint to verify its prior samples by this 
Wednesday (12/30). 


l 



There's been controversy that DEQ dropped two sampling sites with high lead levels from its second six-month review. It 
was appropriate for DEQ to do so because those sites did not meet federal criteria. It was also appropriate for DEQ to 
require flushing taps the night before sampling to ensure faucets didn't contain overly stagnant water. 

Charts show that most water samples were taken in the sixth month of the six-month testing period. The report said it's 
tough to determine if the lateness of the sampling affects the accuracy. 

The report ends with an excellent timeline. I have attached the report in case you want to review the timeline on page 
11 . 


Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 
Office: 517-335-6397 

Mobile: jlHagli^iiElil 

Twitter: @meholland 


2 



JCCCCCCCCCCCC 



OAC 

Viii\ j 




jia 

Auditor General 

201. N. Washington Square, Sixth. Floor * Lansing, Michigan 48913 * Phone: (51 7} 334-8050 • www.audgen.michjgan.gov 


December 23, 2015 


The Honorable Jim Ananich 

Senate Minority Leader ..j§||§ |F |k 

State Capitol, Room S-105 
Lansing, Michigan 

Dear Senator Ananich: 

Enclosed are answers to the questions you posed in your October 20, 2015 letter to our 
office regarding the audit we are conducting of the Office dt Drinking Water and Municipal 
Assistance (ODWMA), Department of Environmental Ouality (DEQ), specific to lead 
contamination in the City of Flint's drinking watef, Also enclosed are additional questions 
we developed that are relevant to these issues, along with five exhibits: 

• A map showing Flint water simples byi zip code. 

• A map showing lead counts of 5 partsiper billion or higher. 

• Two charts showing the number of samples by time period and zip code. 

• A time line of the Flint water review. 

We appreciate the opportunity to assist you in answering questions regarding this topic. If 
you have further questions or a request for other services, please do not hesitate to 
contact our officeTT J 

isix. Sincerely, 


Doug Ring I er 

T: :: Auditor General 

Encibflifes .Jill* 



Q1 : How does ODWMA ensure the data it receives is accurate? 

A: With regard to the United States Environmental Protection A genc y (EPA) Lead 
and Copper Rule (LCR) monitoring requirements, DEQ relies on the following key 
controls to ensure the accuracy of test results: 

• State-owned laboratories test water samples, 

• State-owned laboratories send test results directly to QSDL 

• The City of Flint Water Treatment Plant (Flint WTP) certifies whether 

sample sites are classified as tier 1*, 

The current Flint WTP LCR sampling process includes 

1 . DEO informs the Flint WTP of the- required water lead and copper 
sample size. 

2. The Flint WTP determines the pool of tier 1 sites for sampling. 

3. The Flint WTP setectPHe sample. 

4. The Flint WTP sends out sample kits and instructions to residents for 
collecting water samples. j||§fl r '' : 

5. Residents leave samples and signed sampling forms outside their front 
doors. 

6. The Flint WTP employee picks up samples and forms from residents. 

X The Flint WTP efffpfbyee reviews sample forms for completeness. 

8. The Flint WTP employee sends samples to the State-owned 
laboratories. 

% State-owned laboratories test samples and provide results directly to 

I iIIIIeq. 

10. DEQ receives water lead and copper sample results, which include 
the following information: date collected, date received, address 
where collected, type of residence (e.g., single family or apartment), 
and sample point (e.g., kitchen sink or bathroom sink). 

\ 11. DEQ tracks, and follows up if necessary, the number of samples 

collected by the Flint WTP to help ensure that the required minimum 
number of samples are collected by the monitoring period deadline. 


Single-family or multiple-family residence with lead service line, lead solder copper piping 
constructed after 1982, or lead plumbing. 


Page 1 


1 2. The Flint WTP submits lead and copper report to DEQ that certifies 
whether sample sites meet tier 1 criteria. 

13. DEQ prepares the LCR 90th percentile calculation report. 

During our review, we noted two potential improvements for the Flint WTP 
sampling process (see Question 5 of the additional questions answered by the 
OAG regarding tier 1 sample validity): 

• DEQ could verify that the sampling pool was limited to only tier 1 sample 
sites to ensure that the Flint WTP is in compliance with the LCR 

(Title 40, Part 141, section 86(a)(3) of the Code of Federal Regulations 
[ CFR ]). 

• DEQ could independently verify the validity of sample Mil fortifications. 


Q2: What accountability measures are in place for ODWMA staff who fail to l|||vv data 

verification protocols? A 

A: DEQ does not provide any direct oversight over the Flint WTP and, therefore, 
does not have any accountability measures over the Flint WTP's LCR data 
verification protocols. DEQ's data verification protocol for lead and copper 
water sampling is limited to verification that the WTP certifies samples 
submitted to the State-owned laboratories for analysts (see steps 7 and 1 2 in 
the Flint WTP LCR sampling process noted in Question 1 above). We did not 
identify any instances in which ODWMA staff failed to verify that submitted 
samples were certified by the Flint WTP. 


Q3: What accountability measures are in place for ODWMA staff who lie or 

misrepresent information to the EPA? 

A: As with all classified employees, ODWMA staff must adhere to the rules and 
regulations established by the Michigan Civil Service Commission. If any 
ODWMA staff were determined to misrepresent information to the EPA, they 
would be sybj^ot to Civil Service Rule 2-6, Discipline, which allows an 
appointing authority to discipline an employee for just cause up to and including 
dismissal. #e are not aware of any DEQ-established measures that are in 
addition to the Civil Service Rules. 

We gained access to the e-mail accounts of key DEQ management (DEQ 
Director, Deputy Director, ODWMA Chief, and other key ODWMA staff) 
extending back to January 1 , 2013. We did so to identify the key decision 
points and conversations that occurred leading up to and through the situation in 
Flint. Our review was also intended to determine whether State, Flint, or other 
officials attempted to conceal key test results or other information. 

We noted one e-mail exchange between DEQ and the EPA that appears to be a 
significant contributor to the concern that DEQ misrepresented information to 
the EPA. The EPA requested clarification on February 26, 2015 regarding the 
type of optimized corrosion control treatment the Flint WTP was using. DEQ 
responded on February 27, 2015 that the city had an optimized corrosion 
control program in place, but DEQ did not provide any program details. DEQ 
informed us that the Flint WTP corrosion control program included performing 


Page 2 



lead and copper monitoring for two consecutive six-month periods to determine 
whether corrosion control treatment would be necessary in the future. 

However, it appears the EPA interpreted corrosion control program to mean that 
corrosion control treatment was being performed. 

On April 23, 201 5, the EPA again inquired as to what the Flint WTP was doing 
for corrosion control treatment. DEQ responded on April 24, 2015 that the Flint 
WTP was not practicing corrosion control treatment. 

Based on our review of this and other e-mails, we have no specific reason to 
believe that DEQ willfully misrepresented the information to the EPA. 


Q4: What policies do DEQ and ODWMA have in place to escalate major infractions up 

the chain of command? 

A: We did not note any instances of major infractions (i.e., intentional disregard of 
policies, laws, regulations or specific directions) committed by DEQ staff during 
the course of our review. DEQ does not have a formal policy or procedure in 
place to escalate major infractions performed by ODWMA employees; however, 
our review of DEQ correspondence confirmed the e||pation of key issues up the 
chain of command related to the Flint situation, DEQ stated that its informal 
policy is for staff to notify the proper level of management of infractions to 
determine necessary action. 




Application of the LCR 

Q1 : How did the Flint WTP become the primary water supplier for th%City of Flint? 

A: Upon notification of the City of Flint's plans to switch to the Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) in April 2013, the Detroit Water and Sewefage Department 
(DWSD) submitted a letter to the City of Flint stating that ft would terminate its 
agreement to provide water services on April 17, 2014. 

According to DEQ management, the Flint WTP attempted to negotiate with the 
DWSD to maintain it as the City of Flint water supplier; however, after 
negotiations were unsuccessful, the City of Flint notified DEQ through a permit 
request of its intent to operate the Flint WTP full time using the Flint Rivet. 
Although the Flint City Council voted in March 2013 it|:support of moving to the 
KWA pipeline, the vote was silent on the use of the Flint River as a temporary 
drinking water source. J||: || 

The Flint River was approved by DEQ in 2006 as a backup source of water for 
emergency purposes prior to the switch from the DWSD WTP to the Flint WTP. 
On a quarterly basis, the Flint WTP tested the treated Flint River water at the 
Flint WTP, which met water qualify standards; however, the Flint WTP did not 
test the water's effect on |||: ;; distribution system at consumer tap locations. 


Q2. Did DEQ consult with the EPA prior to determining how to apply the LCR? 

A: DEQ did not consult with the EPA on how to apply the LCR prior to 

implementing two consecutive six-month monitoring periods of the Flint WTP 
beginning July 1 , 2014, Based on p!§t experiences applying the LCR monitoring 
requirements, DEQ believed that it had appropriately applied the LCR 
requirements of a large water system. 


Q3: When Flint switched to the Flint River water source, should corrosion control 

treatment have been r|||jptained? 

A: We believe that corrosion control treatment should have been maintained. 

According to the LCR, a water system can achieve optimized corrosion control if 
it submits results of tap water monitoring for two consecutive six-month 
monitoring periods with acceptable lead levels. However, a water system that 
has optimized corrosion control, and which has treatment in place, should 
x continue to operate and maintain optimal corrosion control treatment. 

DEllpaff explained that they did not treat the switch to Flint River water as a 
new system, but as a new source. DEQ further stated that because the Flint 
River was a new water source and there was a change in chemicals needed to 
treat the new source, a corrosion control study was needed to determine the 
impact on the water distribution system. Therefore, it was DEQ's interpretation 
that two rounds of six-month monitoring were still needed to evaluate the water 
quality and determine optimal corrosion control treatment. 


Page 4 


The Flint water system had optimal corrosion control treatment when the DWSD 
WTP was the water supplier. Based on our review of notes from a July 21 , 
2015 EPA and DEQ conference call on DEQ's implementation of the LCR 
regarding whether the Flint WTP should have continued to maintain corrosion 
control treatment, it appeared that the EPA did not agree with DEQ's 
interpretation of the LCR. Region 5 EPA staff explained that they would talk to 
the EPA headquarters about the interpretation of regulations and believes that 
systems that have been deemed optimized need to "maintain" corrosion control. 
The Region agreed to provide supporting regulatory citation%|||the language 
about maintaining corrosion control. 

On November 3, 201 5, the EPA issued a memorandum stating that the LCR had 
differing possible interpretations; however, the EPA concluded that it is 
important for large water systems to take the steps necessary to ensure that 
appropriate corrosion control treatment is maintained at all times, thus ensuring 
that public health is protected. Based on this clarification, it appears that 
corrosion control treatment should have been maintained. 


Q4: Should DEQ have required the Flint WTP to start pursuing optimized corrosion r 

control treatment after the first round of six-month sampling results were above the 
lead action level of 5 parts per billion (ppb)? 

A: Yes. According to DEO's application of the LCR, within six months after the 
end of the monitoring period in which the water sample results exceeded the 
acceptable lead level, DEQ should have required the Flint WTP to start pursuing 
optimized corrosion contrlllleatment. 

The LCR states that the lead action level is exceeded if the lead level, as 
determined by the 90th percentile calculation, is greater than 15 ppb. If the 
lead action level is exceeded, water Systems are required to take additional 
actions Including educating the public about lead in drinking water as well as 
commencing lead service line replacement if the water system has already 
installed corrosion control and/or source water treatment. However, for water 
systems that have not yet implemented corrosion control treatment, they can be 
deemed to have optimized corrosion control without installing treatment if they 
can demonstrat'd lead levels below 5 ppb for two consecutive six-month periods. 

The first round of six-month sampling results was received in late March 2015. 
Because the results were 1 ppb over the lead action level of 5 ppb, DEQ would 
not be able to achieve two consecutive six-month periods below 5 ppb. 
Therefore, DEQ should have notified the Flint WTP to start pursuing optimized 
corrosion control treatment. However, DEQ waited until the second round of 
sampling was completed (June 30, 2015) to assess whether water sample 
results improved. 

Water Samples 

Q5: Did D£Q verify that only tier 1 sample sites were selected by the Flint WTP in the 

two roiMds of six-month samples? 

A: DEQ did not verify that only tier 1 sample sites were selected. DEQ relies on 
the Flint WTP’s certification of sample sites and does not perform any 
independent verification of those certifications. 


Page 5 



In a November 19, 2015 Flint Journal article, the Flint WTP indicated that it did 
not have the ability to ensure that all sites were tier 1 . In fact, water samples 
came from the random distribution of 175 testing bottles without regard for 
whether the homes were at risk for high lead levels. DEQ issued a formal 
memorandum on November 9, 2015 requesting that the Flint WTP verify the 
classification of all prior sample items. The results are due back from the Flint 
WTP on December 30, 201 5. 


Q6: DEQ dropped two water sampling sites from its second six-month sample 

(January 1, 2015 through June 30, 2015). Was this appropriate? 

A: Yes, it was appropriate for DEQ to drop these two water sampling sites. Federal 
regulation 40 CFR 141 .86(a) states: 

"... each water system shall complete a materials evaluation 
of its distribution system in order to identify a pool of targeted: 
sampling sites that meets the requirements of this section . . . 

All sites from which first draw samples are collected shall be 
selected from this pool . . . Sampling sites mayliqt include 
faucets that have point-of-use of point-of-entry treatment 
devices designed to remove inorgante contaminants." 

This regulation also requires that a water system's targeted sampling pool 
consist of only tier 1 sampling sites if an adequate number is available to meet 
monitoring requirements. 

According to federal regulation 40 CFR 141 .86(1), the State may invalidate a 
water sample if it determines that the sarrpf& v :was taken from a site that did not 
meet the site selection criteria, A sample invalidated per this regulation does 
not count toward determining lead or copper 90th percentile levels or toward 
meeting the minimum monitoring requirements. 

DEQ dropped one water sample stte from its 90th percentile calculations 
because the site was from a business that does not meet the tier 1 requirements 
of being a single-family or multiple-family residence. The second sample site 
was dropped because the home had a point-of-entry treatment device to filter 
contaminants, Based on the criteria specified above, it appears that DEQ’s 
rationale for dropping the samples from these two sites appropriately met the 
requirements for invalidating samples per federal regulation 40 CFR 141.86. 


Q7: Was flushing of the taps the night before drawing a sample an appropriate sample 

methodology? 

A: Yes. The LCR requires that samples be a first draw of water after six hours of 
: stagnation. The LCR does not indicate whether or not the water line should be 
flushed prior to collecting the sample. In the sample instructions, DEQ required 
preflushing to ensure that sampled faucets were not stagnant for an excessive 
period of time beyond the targeted six hours (e.g., rarely used faucets or when a 
horrifbwner has been gone for an extended period of time.) 

The LCR requires six hours of stagnation; however, it does not preclude DEQ 
from instructing residents to flush prior to stagnation. 


Page 6 




In calendar year 1992, the Flint WTP established a tier 1 sample site pool for LCR 
monitoring. With the change to the Flint River water, the Flint WTP needed to increase the 
pool of sample locations because of additional sampling requirements. The following 
exhibit documents the 2014 and 201 5 sample locations for LCR monitoring. Based on the 
data obtained during our review, we could not determine how the locations were selected 
or whether they were properly classified as tier 1 sample sites. 

As noted in Question 5 of the additional questions answered by the OAG, DEQ has 
requested the Flint WTP to verify the tier 1 classification of ail prior sample items. 



Source: The OAG prepared this map using data obtained from DEQ and ®OpenStreetMap contributors 

(opendatacommons.org). The sample locations are approximate. 


Page 7 







This chart expands on Exhibit #1 to show a summary by zip code and time of selection 
within the sampling period. Based on the data obtained during our review, we could not 
determine if the lateness of selection within the monitoring period affep|l|: the 
appropriateness of the sample items. 



Source: Tbe OAG prepareH tips chart using data obtained from DEQ. 


Page 9 







^§§!:, 0 0 


July 2014 \ &&gust 201 4\ September 2014 October 2014 November 201-1 December 2014 


Source: T%£ OAG prepares} this chart using data obtained from DEQ. 


Page 10 







OAG 


555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555555^^ 


October 1, 2015 


0 Michigan Department of 
Health and Human Services 
confirms results of Hurley 
Medical Center study. 

° City of Flint urges residents 
to not drink water. 


March 2013 

Flint City Council voted 7-1 to 
join Karegnondi Water Authority 
(KWA). 


July 2014 

| DEQ begins the first six-month Flint 
j lead/copper monitoring period. 


Mid-March 2014 

City of Flint decides to use the 
Flint River as a water source. 


January 1, 2015 

DEQ begins the second six-month 
Flint lead/copper monitoring period. 


January 12, 2015 


October 8, 2015 | 

| City of Flint develops plan to 
i reconnect to DWSD. 


DWSD offers the City of Flint a 
waiver of the $4 million 
reconnection fee to switch back to 
Detroit water. 


January 29, 2015 


City of Flint emergency managgt,. 
Jerry Ambrose declines DWSD 
water source reconnection. 


March 30, 2015 


i j DEQ notifies the Flint WTP Of : 
the first six-mo+vth eadcopper 
|| monitoring period. 


May 28. 2015 

Sample results from the 
residence noted with high levels 
: 00 February 26, 2015 show 
llUpfevels look good after a 
nlw copper service line 
installation. 


August 17, 2015 

DEQ notifies the Flint WTP of the 
second six-month lead/copper 
monitoring results. 


August 23, 2015 

Virginia Tech researcher notifies 
DEQ that he will begin a study of 
the City of Flint water quality. 


October 16. 2015 

City of Flint reconnects to DWSD. 


October 19, 2015 j 

i DEQ Director Dan Wyant states: i 

i "... staff made a mistake while j 

I working with the city of Flint. 

! Simply stated, staff employed a i 

| federal [corrosion control] protocol ! 

I they believed was appropriate, 

! and it was not." 



April 16. 2013 


City of Flint emergency 
manager Ed Kurtz signs 
agreement to switch from 
Detroit Water and Sewerage 
Department (DWSD) water 
source to KWA. 


April 17, 2013 

DWSD said it will stop selling 
water to the City of Flint in 
April 2014. 


April 25, 2014 


City of Flint switches to Flint 
River water. 


February 3, 2015 


| f5sls®^m^i$ftyder awards the Qty 
if of Flint find leaks and 

1 replace wastewater sicinerator. 


April 24, 2015 


i DEQ indicates no corrosion control 
j | (orthophosphate) chemical in 
Is j place (treatment). 


July 21, 2015 


The EPA and DEQ hold 
conference call on DEQ's 
implementation of the Lead and 
Copper Rule (LCR) and Flint 


February 26, 201 S 


jilt EPA discusses a resident's 
: f§|§§|: ; sample testing results with 
DEQ levels of lead found in 
water),. 


September 2, 2015 


Virginia Tech researcher claims 
that the corrosiveness of the Flint 
water is causing lead to leach into 
residents' water. 

September 24, 2015 

Hurley Medical Center study 
issued showing high blood lead 
levels in City of Flint children. 


November 3, 2015 


The EPA indicates differing 
possible interpretations of the LCR 
with respect to how the LCR's 
optimal corrosion control 
treatment procedures apply to this 
situation (new water source/new 
water treatment). 


February 27, 2015 


DEQ responded to the EPA saying 
that the Flint WTP has an 
optimized corrosion control 
program. 


Source: The OAG prepared this time line using data (e-mails, meeting notes, and letters) obtained from DEQ, newspaper and press release articles, the Flintwaterstudy.org, and the Hurley Medical Center survey results, 


Page 1 1 








From: Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, December 24, 2015 8:41 AM 

To: Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Walsh, John 

(GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); 'calley^^^^^^^^^^B 
Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Subject: Please provide feedback: Governor's statement on Flint water crisis 


Colleagues: 

Many of us have reached the conclusion that our messaging on the Flint water crisis has room for improvement. We 
haven't conveyed to citizens the depth of our concern over the situation. I've crafted a statement to be made by the 
Governor, and would like you to review it. 

This statement is meant to manage expectations on the timing of concrete conclusions (the task force report may not 
come out for another month at least) and to signal that action may come sooner than that (we plan to reach out to 
Mayor Weaver, for example, and perhaps hold a press conference with her in January announcing some next steps). 

Here is the statement: 

"I've been briefed on the recent meeting of the task force studying the Flint water situation and I've read the report 
from the Office of the Auditor General on the processes used by DEQ to monitor Flint water. 

"No matter what the testing requirements were, they were not enough to prevent this crisis. I want Michigan to be the 
state that is known for the safest water in the nation. 

"I'd like to thank the task force for keeping me apprised of their continuing investigation. As they uncover more facts, it's 
clear to me we can do better. The report may take another month or so, but if we need to make changes more swiftly, I 
plan to take immediate action. 

"The bottom line is we'll take responsibility for our part in Flint's water crisis. I'm committed to partnering with all of the 
stakeholders who are as concerned about public health as I am. I vow to make sure that Flint citizens will have safe 
drinking water. And I'm so very sorry that this happened. 

"But I know an apology isn't enough. We've already allocated $10 million to test the water, distribute water filters, and 
help in other ways. On Thursday, I called Flint Mayor Karen Weaver, and we're going to sit down in the next week to 
discuss other ways the state can offer assistance. 

"What happened in Flint is inexcusable. I want to assure residents there that we will work hard to make things right." 

Thank you, 

Meegan 

Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 
Office: 517-335-6397 

Mobile:^taagfflB iJiiiaiis1 

Twitter: @meholland 


l 



From: Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, December 24, 201 5 1 0:32 AM 

To: 'Baird, Richard (GOV)' 

Cc: Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Walsh, John 

(GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Calley, Brian (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Subject: RE: Please provide feedback: Governor's statement on Flint water crisis 


Here is a revised statement incorporating Rich's suggested changes: 

"I've been briefed on the recent meeting of the task force studying the Flint water situation and I've read the report 
from the Office of the Auditor General on the processes used by DEQ to monitor Flint water. 

""The bi-partisan task force has worked tirelessly to interview Flint, Genesee County, state and federal officials to 
complete its independent analysis. They are reviewing hundreds of documents at all levels of government and from the 
public health science community. 

"I'd like to thank the task force for keeping me apprised of their continuing investigation. As they uncover more facts, it's 
clear to me we can do better. Their report may take another month or so, but if we need to make changes more swiftly, 

I plan to take immediate action. 

"No matter what the testing requirements were, they were not enough to prevent this crisis. I want Michigan to be the 
state that is known for the safest water in the nation. 

""When it comes to matters of health and quality of life, there is simply no room for error in testing for lead and other 
toxins. I understand there can be disagreements within the scientific community. That is why I have told my directors at 
MDEQ and DHHS to invite every external scientist who has worked on the Flint water issue to the state laboratory 
facilities to work as partners with us. Together, we should be able to affirm that we're using the very best testing 
protocols to ensure Flint residents have safe drinking water and that we're doing proper monitoring and remediation of 
blood levels and other health impacts over the long term. 

"I want the Flint community and all citizens of Michigan to know how very sorry I am that this has happened. 

"But I know an apology isn't enough. We've already allocated $10 million to test the water, distribute water filters, and 
help in other ways. On Thursday, I called Flint Mayor Karen Weaver, and we're going to sit down in the next week to 
discuss other ways the state can offer assistance. 

"What happened in Flint is inexcusable. I want to assure residents there that we will work hard to make things right." 


From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, December 24, 2015 9:53 AM 

To: Holland, Meegan (GOV) <HollandM2@michigan.gov> 

Cc: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) <hollinsh@michigan.gov>; Posthumus, Dick (GOV) <Posthumusd@michigan.gov>; Redford, 
James (GOV) <RedfordJ@michigan.gov>; Walsh, John (GOV) <WalshJ@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
<clemente@michigan.gov>; Calley, Brian (GOV) Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov> 

Subject: Re: Please provide feedback: Governor's statement on Flint water crisis 

This is the best narrative I have seen that actually describes how we feel about the situation and our resolve to make 
things right. A few thoughts: 


l 



We might think about a "lead in" to your second para in the statement. Something like "The bi-partisan task force has 
worked tirelessly to interview Flint, Genesee County, State and Federal officials and complete an independent fact based 
analysis. They have reviewed hundreds of documents at all levels of government and from the public health science 
community and continue to do so. 

Para 3 might unintentionally suggest that there are public health stakeholders who are not as serious as the 
governor. This may be an overreach, but may I suggest 

"When it comes to matters of health and quality of life, there is simply no room for error in testing for lead and other 
toxins. I understand there can be disagreements within the scientific community. That is why I have directed my 
Directors of MDEQand DH HS to invite every external scientist who has worked on the Flint water issue to the state 
laboratory facilities to work as partners with us. Together, we should be able to affirm that every testing protocol and 
conclusion validates that Flint citizens will have safe drinking water, and that we are doing everything possible to ensure 
proper monitoring and remediation of blood levels and physical or neurological impacts over the long term. And I want 
the Flint community and all citizens of Michigan to know how very sorry I am that this has happened." 

Nick and Dan might not like the "invite" but I spoken with them both and they of course will support whatever the Boss 
decides. 

Thanks, 

Rich 

Sent from my iPad 

On Dec 24, 2015, at 7:41 AM, Holland, Meegan (GOV) < HojiandM2@m;chigan.gov > wrote: 

Colleagues: 

Many of us have reached the conclusion that our messaging on the Flint water crisis has room for 
improvement. We haven't conveyed to citizens the depth of our concern over the situation. I've crafted 
a statement to be made by the Governor, and would like you to review it. 

This statement is meant to manage expectations on the timing of concrete conclusions (the task force 
report may not come out for another month at least) and to signal that action may come sooner than 
that (we plan to reach out to Mayor Weaver, for example, and perhaps hold a press conference with her 
in January announcing some next steps). 

Flere is the statement: 

"I've been briefed on the recent meeting of the task force studying the Flint water situation and I've 
read the report from the Office of the Auditor General on the processes used by DEQ to monitor Flint 
water. 

"No matter what the testing requirements were, they were not enough to prevent this crisis. I want 
Michigan to be the state that is known for the safest water in the nation. 

"I'd like to thank the task force for keeping me apprised of their continuing investigation. As they 
uncover more facts, it's clear to me we can do better. The report may take another month or so, but if 
we need to make changes more swiftly, I plan to take immediate action. 


2 



"The bottom line is we'll take responsibility for our part in Flint's water crisis. I'm committed to 
partnering with all of the stakeholders who are as concerned about public health as I am. I vow to make 
sure that Flint citizens will have safe drinking water. And I'm so very sorry that this happened. 

"But I know an apology isn't enough. We've already allocated $10 million to test the water, distribute 
water filters, and help in other ways. On Thursday, I called Flint Mayor Karen Weaver, and we're going 
to sit down in the next week to discuss other ways the state can offer assistance. 

"What happened in Flint is inexcusable. I want to assure residents there that we will work hard to make 
things right." 

Thank you, 

Meegan 

Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 
Office: 517-335-6397 
M n h i I p • 

Twitter: @meholland 


3 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Thursday, December 24, 2015 10:48 AM 
'Baird, Richard (GOV)' 

RE: Today's Briefing 

DRAFT Flint water communications plan.docx 


It occurs to me - should he also receive the communications plan we've been working on? I've sent you an updated one 
(with the revised statement). 

Original Message 

From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, December 24, 2015 10:24 AM 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV) < honinsb@michiKan.goy >; Holland, Meegan 
(GOV) < HoHandM2rcarriichigan.gov >; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Agen j ■£> m ich iga n .gov > 

Subject: Today's Briefing 

Sorry for the late submission. Been trying to work this issue across various stakeholder groups and balance holiday 
commitments. Our Agenda (with Harvey adding under "Other": 

1. Review HH Role and Responsibility as confirmed with FAATF (attachment (with some revision since meeting) 

2. Other AATF Issues 

a) schedule a conference call with Governor outlining current status 

b) follow up with a letter discussing DEQ and leadership culture findings 

c) Imminent Danger Declaration request 

d) Concerns with Leadership appointments about to be made and DHHS recent responses/findings 

e) Shared confidential plan relative to January 4 personnel actions 

3. Discuss communications strategy as envisioned by MH, JA and RB last night (Meegan will be on call-Maybe Jarrod too 
busy not sure about yet) 

4. Other (Harvey Hollins will deal with anything I missed) 


To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) I 


l 



DRAFT: FLINT WATER PLAN 


Thursday, Dec. 24: Gov. calls Karen Weaver to set up a meeting 

Talking points: 

"I've read the draft of a report from the state's Office of the Auditor General and I've been briefed on 
the task force's progress in its ongoing investigation. 

"I want to work together with you to get this problem solved. As partners, we can get resources in place 
more quickly. 

"I want to assure you this isn't a political move on my part - I'm a problem solver and I intend to be your 
partner in addressing this to make it right. I'm truly sorry that all this has happened. 

"I have some ideas on how to get more resources for blood lead level testing and remediation - financial 
as well as state personnel, and I'd like to discuss those with you. 

"It sounds like you have a block of time available on the morning of Jan. 7. Would you be able to come 
to Lansing so we could talk between 9-10 a.m.? If so, I'll make sure Beth Emmitt, my scheduler, confirms 
with Maxine Murray." 

Saturday, Dec. 26, or Monday, Dec. 28: Getting organized 

We need to get the ball rolling on creating a healthy water communications team - potentially Mel 
Brown of TED and Ron Leix of MSP's Emergency Management and Homeland Security Division. Both are 
genuine and empathetic, and can convey information in a reassuring way. 

This duo would work with DHHS' and DEQ's respective communications teams, but also free up those 
teams to work on other issues not related to Flint water. The healthy water team would be the point 
people for anything concerning Flint water and lead issues, and will have the authority to assist Harvey 
Hollins, cut red tape for researchers who want access to DHHS and DEQ records, respond to media 
requests, edit and/or write press releases in conjunction with the Governor's communications team and 
more. 

Rich Baird or another appropriate person needs to discuss with Steve Arwood and Col. Etue about 
"borrowing" Mel and Ron. We would like to introduce these two at the January press conference with 
the Governor and Mayor Weaver, saying, "These are the folks who will answer questions and provide 
information to media and stakeholders about the Flint water crisis." 

Monday, Dec. 28, or Tuesday, Dec. 29: Asking researchers for help 

Nick Lyon reaches out to Virginia Tech researcher Marc Edwards and Hurley Hospital's Dr. Mona Hanna- 
Attisha to help state lead and water experts who have worked on Flint's issues. The purpose is to share 
information, compare results and track how those results were reached to ensure best practices and 
accurate reporting. 

We'd ask this of Edwards and Hanna-Attisha: 

Your research has been eye opening and we're hoping you'll be willing to join an effort to 
ensure Flint's water is safe. 



We'd like you to sit down with state epidemiologists and other researchers so you can discuss 
lead levels and other issues related to the Flint water crisis. There have been variances and we 
want to be as accurate as possible. 

We want you to have as much access to our data as is possible under HIPPA laws so we can 
determine the extent of the problem. 

We want the team to brainstorm ways to get Flint's water back to safe levels for drinking, and to 
help families learn how they can mitigate any effects from lead. 

Once the water is safe, we want your help in showing the people of Flint that their water is 
drinkable. 

If you're willing to help, we'd like to announce this at a press conference in January and would 
love to have you both attend, if possible. 

In addition, Capt. Chris Kelenske and/or Nick Lyon need to explore more ways to help Flint, including the 
idea of an imminent danger declaration. Has MSHDA explored HUD grants to help families who need to 
upgrade their service lines? Are there other resources we can draw from? 

Tuesday, Dec. 29: Governor releases statement on Flint water 

This statement is meant to manage expectations on the timing of the report (probably another month at 
least) and to signal that action may come sooner than that (the Jan. 4 changes and those to be 
announced at the press conference). 

"I've been briefed on the recent meeting of the task force studying the Flint water situation and I've 
read the report from the Office of the Auditor General on the processes used by DEQto monitor Flint 
water. 

""The bi-partisan taskforce has worked tirelessly to interview Flint, Genesee County, state and federal 
officials to complete its independent analysis. They are reviewing hundreds of documents at all levels of 
government and from the public health science community. 

"I'd like to thank the task force for keeping me apprised of their continuing investigation. As they 
uncover more facts, it's clear to me we can do better. Their report may take another month or so, but if 
we need to make changes more swiftly, I plan to take immediate action. 

"No matter what the testing requirements were, they were not enough to prevent this crisis. I want 
Michigan to be the state that is known for the safest water in the nation. 

""When it comes to matters of health and quality of life, there is simply no room for error in testing for 
lead and other toxins. I understand there can be disagreements within the scientific community. That is 
why I have told my directors at MDEQ and DHHS to invite every external scientist who has worked on 
the Flint water issue to the state laboratory facilities to work as partners with us. Together, we should 
be able to affirm that we're using the very best testing protocols to ensure Flint residents have safe 
drinking water and that we're doing proper monitoring and remediation of blood levels and other health 
impacts over the long term. 

"I want the Flint community and all citizens of Michigan to know how very sorry I am that this has 
happened. 

"But I know an apology isn't enough. We've already allocated $10 million to test the water, distribute 
water filters, and help in other ways. On Thursday, I called Flint Mayor Karen Weaver, and we're going 
to sit down in the next week to discuss other ways the state can offer assistance. 



"What happened in Flint is inexcusable. I want to assure residents there that we will work hard to make 
things right." 

Monday, Jan. 4- Personnel changes 

Dave Murray talking point: "I can't speak to the specifics, but yes, there have been changes in personnel 
at the DEQ. We'll announce soon who you can contact to get information about Flint's water situation. 
For now, you can call me." 

Thursday, Jan. 7 - Meeting between the Governor and Mayor Karen Weaver 

Governor's talking point: "We had a great meeting today. Mayor Weaver had some great ideas that we 
want to flesh out. We'll announce soon how we plan to move forward in solving the problems with Flint 
water." 

Possibly Jan. 11 or 13 - Press conference with the Governor and Mayor Weaver to announce action 
plan 

Also in attendance: Point person Flarvey Hollins, Directors Nick Lyons and Dan Wyant, Capt. Chris 
Kelenske, Healthy Water communications team Mel Brown and Ron Leix, Sen. Jim Ananich, Rep. ???, 
Marc Edwards?, Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha, who else? 

Talking points: 

Weaver announces more state money to help Flint and talks about how she's encouraged by the 
Governor's action plan and looks forward to working with Harvey Hollins. 

Harvey briefly describes his role - as the boots on the ground in Flint and the coordinator for state 
resources. 

Gov. Snyder reiterates his sadness over the situation and says it calls for extraordinary measures, which 
the state is prepared to make: 

o The state will form a team of independent and state water and lead level experts to go 
over the various results. The team will include Virginia Tech's Marc Edwards and Hurley 
Hospital's Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha, along with state epidemiologists, DEQ experts, etc. 
o The team will have full access to DEQ and DHHS records. 

o Mel Brown and Ron Leix will be the Healthy Water team and serve as point people for 
all things Flint water and lead levels. 

o The state is exploring the best options to provide more help for Flint, including an 
imminent danger declaration, HUD grants for infrastructure improvements, etc. 
o We will document what we learn from this experience to help other cities with 
water/lead issues. 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Thursday, December 24, 2015 12:05 PM 



latest comms plan 

DRAFT Flint water communications plan.docx 


Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 
Office: 517-335-6397 
Mobile: 

Twitter: 



l 




DRAFT: FLINT WATER PLAN 


Thursday, Dec. 24: Gov. calls Karen Weaver to set up a meeting 

Talking points: 

"I've read the draft of a report from the state's Office of the Auditor General and I've been briefed on 
the task force's progress in its ongoing investigation. 

"I want to work together with you to get this problem solved. As partners, we can get resources in place 
more quickly. 

"I want to assure you this isn't a political move on my part - I'm a problem solver and I intend to be your 
partner in addressing this to make it right. I'm truly sorry that all this has happened. 

"I have some ideas on how to get more resources for blood lead level testing and remediation - financial 
as well as state personnel, and I'd like to discuss those with you. 

"It sounds like you have a block of time available on the morning of Jan. 7. Would you be able to come 
to Lansing so we could talk between 9-10 a.m.? If so, I'll make sure Beth Emmitt, my scheduler, confirms 
with Maxine Murray." 

Saturday, Dec. 26, or Monday, Dec. 28: Getting organized 

We need to get the ball rolling on creating a healthy water communications team - potentially Mel 
Brown of TED and Ron Leix of MSP's Emergency Management and Homeland Security Division. Both are 
genuine and empathetic, and can convey information in a reassuring way. 

This duo would work with DHHS' and DEQ's respective communications teams, but also free up those 
teams to work on other issues not related to Flint water. The healthy water team would be the point 
people for anything concerning Flint water and lead issues, and will have the authority to assist Harvey 
Hollins, cut red tape for researchers who want access to DHHS and DEQ records, respond to media 
requests, edit and/or write press releases in conjunction with the Governor's communications team and 
more. 

Rich Baird or another appropriate person needs to discuss with Steve Arwood and Col. Etue about 
"borrowing" Mel and Ron. We would like to introduce these two at the January press conference with 
the Governor and Mayor Weaver, saying, "These are the folks who will answer questions and provide 
information to media and stakeholders about the Flint water crisis." 

Monday, Dec. 28, or Tuesday, Dec. 29: Asking researchers for help 

Nick Lyon reaches out to Virginia Tech researcher Marc Edwards and Hurley Hospital's Dr. Mona Hanna- 
Attisha to help state lead and water experts who have worked on Flint's issues. The purpose is to share 
information, compare results and track how those results were reached to ensure best practices and 
accurate reporting. 

We'd ask this of Edwards and Hanna-Attisha: 

Your research has been eye opening and we're hoping you'll be willing to join an effort to 
ensure Flint's water is safe. 



We'd like you to sit down with state epidemiologists and other researchers so you can discuss 
lead levels and other issues related to the Flint water crisis. There have been variances and we 
want to be as accurate as possible. 

We want you to have as much access to our data as is possible under HIPPA laws so we can 
determine the extent of the problem. 

We want the team to brainstorm ways to get Flint's water back to safe levels for drinking, and to 
help families learn how they can mitigate any effects from lead. 

Once the water is safe, we want your help in showing the people of Flint that their water is 
drinkable. 

If you're willing to help, we'd like to announce this at a press conference in January and would 
love to have you both attend, if possible. 

In addition, Capt. Chris Kelenske and/or Nick Lyon need to explore more ways to help Flint, including the 
idea of an imminent danger declaration. Has MSHDA explored HUD grants to help families who need to 
upgrade their service lines? Are there other resources we can draw from? 

Tuesday, Dec. 29: Governor releases statement on Flint water 

This statement is meant to manage expectations on the timing of the report (probably another month at 
least) and to signal that action may come sooner than that (the Jan. 4 changes and those to be 
announced at the press conference). 

"I've been briefed on the recent meeting of the task force studying the Flint water situation and I've 
read the report from the Office of the Auditor General on the processes used by DEQto monitor Flint 
water. 

"The bi-partisan taskforce has worked tirelessly to interview Flint, Genesee County, state and federal 
officials to complete its independent analysis. They are reviewing hundreds of documents at all levels of 
government and from the public health science community. 

"I'd like to thank the task force for keeping me apprised of their continuing investigation. As they 
uncover more facts, it's clear to me we can do better. Their report may take another month or so, but if 
we need to make changes more swiftly, I plan to take immediate action. 

"No matter what the testing requirements were, they were not enough to prevent this crisis. 

"When it comes to matters of health and quality of life, we're committed to doing everything we can to 
protect the well-being of our citizens. I understand there can be disagreements within the scientific 
community. That is why I have told my directors at MDEQ and DHHS to invite every external scientist 
who has worked on the Flint water issue to the state laboratory facilities to work as partners with us. 
Together, we should be able to affirm that we're using the very best testing protocols to ensure Flint 
residents have safe drinking water and that we're doing proper monitoring and remediation of blood 
levels and other health impacts over the long term. 

"I want the Flint community and all citizens of Michigan to know how very sorry I am that this has 
happened. 

"But I know an apology isn't enough. We've already allocated $10 million to test the water, distribute 
water filters, and help in other ways. On Thursday, I called Flint Mayor Karen Weaver, and we're going 
to sit down in the next week to discuss other ways the state can offer assistance. 



"What happened in Flint is inexcusable. I want to assure residents there that we will work hard to make 
things right." 

Monday, Jan. 4- Personnel changes 

Dave Murray talking point: "I can't speak to the specifics, but yes, there have been changes in personnel 
at the DEQ. We'll announce soon who you can contact to get information about Flint's water situation. 
For now, you can call me." 

Thursday, Jan. 7 - Meeting between the Governor and Mayor Karen Weaver 

Governor's talking point: "We had a great meeting today. Mayor Weaver had some great ideas that we 
want to flesh out. We'll announce soon how we plan to move forward in solving the problems with Flint 
water." 

Possibly Jan. 11 or 13 - Press conference with the Governor and Mayor Weaver to announce action 
plan 

Also in attendance: Point person Flarvey Hollins, Directors Nick Lyons and Dan Wyant, Capt. Chris 
Kelenske, Healthy Water communications team Mel Brown and Ron Leix, Sen. Jim Ananich, Rep. ???, 
Marc Edwards?, Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha, who else? 

Talking points: 

Weaver announces more state money to help Flint and talks about how she's encouraged by the 
Governor's action plan and looks forward to working with Harvey Hollins. 

Harvey briefly describes his role - as the boots on the ground in Flint and the coordinator for state 
resources. 

Gov. Snyder reiterates his sadness over the situation and says it calls for extraordinary measures, which 
the state is prepared to make: 

o The state will form a team of independent and state water and lead level experts to go 
over the various results. The team will include Virginia Tech's Marc Edwards and Hurley 
Hospital's Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha, along with state epidemiologists, DEQ experts, etc. 
o The team will have full access to DEQ and DHHS records. 

o Mel Brown and Ron Leix will be the Healthy Water team and serve as point people for 
all things Flint water and lead levels. 

o The state is exploring the best options to provide more help for Flint, including an 
imminent danger declaration, HUD grants for infrastructure improvements, etc. 
o We will document what we learn from this experience to help other cities with 
water/lead issues. 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Monday, December 28, 2015 5:24 PM 
Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

RE: Update on OAG letter and our statement 


Thank you ... I'm definitely still feeling my way. 


Here's hoping 2016 is productive .... AMD fun! 
Meegan 


From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, December 28, 2015 5:14 PM 

To: Holland, Meegan (GOV) <HollandM2@michigan.gov> 

Subject: Re: Update on OAG letter and our statement 

I agree. By the way, you did an awesome job on the phone call with the Gov on the 24th. Happy New Year. 

Best, 

Harvey 

On Dec 28, 2015, at 4:12 PM, Holland, Meegan (GOV) < H ol i a nri M 2 @ rn i c h iga n. go v > wrote: 

Thanks Harvey! And geez --- at some point it would be great to meet you face to face! I hope to get to 
Detroit sooner rather than later. 

Best, 

Meegan 


From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, December 28, 2015 4:07 PM 

To: Holland, Meegan (GOV) <HojjandM2(© Calley, Brian (GOV) 

Snyder, (GOV) Walsh, John 

Redford, James (GOV) < t 1 ed f o r d . .02 i.G !1 = flflD.-. J Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 
< Ag^.Dj.(£l 01 f 0 bLgar:.gpy > ; Baird, Richard (GOV) < !■: flLkll JU® ITjJl'Lbj. J Posthumus, Dick (GOV) 

< O ; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <c!emenfe Scott, Allison 

(GOV) <scpfta l2@m 

Subject: RE: Update on OAG letter and our statement 


Meegan— -attached are a couple edits to the statement. 


From: Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, December 28, 2015 2:09 PM 

To: Calley, Brian (GOV) Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

Walsh, John (GOV) Redford, James (GOV) <.IT_ejd_f ord J AS r=.lL4lbAflsl.O J Agen, 

Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigan.gov> : Baird, Richard (GOV) Hollins, Harvey 

(GOV) <hglHnsh^ Posthumus, Dick (GOV) <PGSthumusd@ Clement, 


l 






Elizabeth (GOV) < deroente#michlg3n.gov >; Scott, Allison (GOV) < scottal2@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Update on OAG letter and our statement 


Colleagues, 

The Office of the Auditor General has released the letter. We've developed a statement, based 
on the summary you read the other night, that spells out how things came down. We hope 
media will pick up on the fact that the DEQ was largely following protocols, or in one case, an 
ambiguous one that EPA later clarified. 

FYI - Sen. Ananich has released the following in regard to the OAG letter: "The Auditor General 
has provided an important piece of this puzzle and I'm sure the extended report they are 
working on will reveal additional information," said Ananich. "What's clear is that corrosion 
control should have been used and there are serious failings in our system that must be 
addressed. Between the FOIA emails released recently and these findings, it's obvious that 
legislative oversight is the best way to see how all of these pieces fit together. I expect holding 
hearings to be high on the agenda when the Legislature returns." 

On Tuesday, we plan to release this statement by the Governor. It's been tweaked slightly since 
our review the other night, thanks to feedback from the Governor, Jim Redford and others. 

"I've been briefed on the recent meeting of the task force studying the Flint water situation and 
I've read the report from the Office of the Auditor General on the processes used by DEQ to 
monitor Flint water. 

"The bi-partisan task force has worked tirelessly to interview Flint, Genesee County, state and 
federal officials to complete its independent analysis. They are reviewing hundreds of 
documents at all levels of government and from the public health science community. 


"I'd like to thank the task force for keeping me apprised of their continuing investigation. As 
they uncover more facts, it's clear to me we can do better. Their report may take another 
month or so, but if we need to make changes more swiftly, I plan to take immediate action. 

"No matter what the testing requirements were, they were not enough to prevent this crisis. 

"When it comes to matters of health and quality of life, we're committed to doing everything 
we can to protect the well-being of our citizens. 

"I understand there can be disagreements within the scientific community. That is why I have 
told my directors at MDEQ and DHHS to invite every external scientist who has worked on the 
Flint water issue to the state laboratory facilities to work as partners with us. Together, we 
should be able to affirm that we're using the very best testing protocols to ensure Flint 
residents have safe drinking water and that we're doing proper monitoring and remediation of 
blood levels and other health impacts over the long term. 

"I want the Flint community and all citizens of Michigan to know how very sorry I am that this 
has happened. 


2 



"But I know an apology isn't enough. We've already allocated $10 million to test the water, 
distribute water filters, and help in other ways. On Thursday, I called Flint Mayor Karen Weaver, 
and we're going to sit down in the next week to discuss other ways the state can offer 
assistance. 

"I want to assure residents there that we will work hard to make things right." 


Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 


Office: 517-335-6397 



Twitter: @meholland 


3 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 


Subject: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 29, 2015 1:21 PM 

Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); 
Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); 

Bedford, James (GOV) 

Flint water statement 



Here is a statement from the Governor that will go out around 2-2:30 p.m. to the media. We'll also give a heads up to 
executive staffers and some others. - Meegan 


When I became aware that the city of Flint's water showed elevated lead levels and that the state's handling of the 
situation was being questioned, I requested funding to switch the source back to the Great Lakes Water Authority and 
appointed an independent task force to identify possible missteps and areas for improvement. 

The task force has done an exceptional job, reviewing stacks of documents and interviewing scores of Flint, Genesee 
County, state and federal officials. 

Although the task force's final report is not yet completed, it has made me aware of some interim findings and 
corrective steps that I have decided to take immediately in order to restore trust in how the state keeps its citizens safe 
and informed. 

We'll continue to work with the community members to make sure we hear and respond to their concerns. 

In addition, MDEQ Director Dan Wyant has offered his resignation, and I've determined that it's appropriate to accept it. 
I'm also making other personnel changes at MDEQ to address problems cited by the task force. 

But changes in leadership and staff are not enough. I understand there can be disagreements within the scientific 
community. That is why I have directed both the departments of Environmental Quality and Health and Human Services 
to invite every external scientist who has worked on this issue to be our partners in helping us improve Flint water. Let's 
share research on water and blood lead level testing so we can arrive at accurate and mutually supported 
conclusions. Together, we should work to affirm that we're using the very best testing protocols to ensure Flint 
residents have safe drinking water and that we're taking steps to protect their health over the short and long term. 

I want the Flint community to know how very sorry I am that this has happened. And I want all Michigan citizens to know 
that we will learn from this experience, because Flint is not the only city that has an aging infrastructure. 

I know many Flint citizens are angry and want more than an apology. That's why I'm taking the actions today to ensure a 
culture of openness and trust. We've already allocated $10 million to test the water, distribute water filters, and help in 
other ways. Last week, I called Flint Mayor Karen Weaver, and we're going to meet soon to discuss other ways the state 
can offer assistance. 

These are only initial steps - we fully expect to take more actions following the recommendations of our task force. 

When it comes to matters of health and quality of life, we're committed to doing everything we can to protect the well- 
being of our citizens. 

Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 

l 




Office: 517-335-6397 


Twitter: @meholland 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 29, 2015 1:45 PM 
Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Here's executive staff memo 


Feel free to send this out asap. - Meegan 
Team, 

As you are aware, we have been working closely with the independent task force that has been reviewing state, local 
and federal actions regarding the serious health issues related to water in Flint. 

Although the task force's final report is not yet complete, members have made the Governor aware of some interim 
findings, and there are interim steps the Governor has decided to take immediately in order to restore trust in how we 
in state government keep residents safe and informed. 

As part of this process, Dan Wyant, director of the Department of Environmental Quality, has offered his resignation, 
and Governor has reluctantly decided to accept it. There are likely to be other personnel changes in MDEQ as well. 

I want to thank Dan for his service. He has been the DEQ director since the start of the administration, and previously 
headed the Agriculture Department under both Gov. Engler and Gov. Granholm. He is passionate about public service 
and protecting our state's environment. 

The situation in Flint is serious and challenging. We will continue work closely with the task force and city leaders as we 
move forward, committed to protecting the health of people living in Flint and around our state. 

Sincerely, 

Jarrod Agen 


Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 
Office: 517-335-6397 

Mobile:^jii§iiyg|Mfl5l 

Twitter: @meholland 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 29, 2015 5:36 PM 

'Baird, Richard (GOV)'; Jarrod Agen (GOV) (AgenJ@michigan.gov) 
RE: Letter of resignation -- Wurfel 


The Detroit News has Brad resigning in this story. The story aiso quotes Edwards and Dr. Mona, saying Dan shouldn't 
necessarily have been fired. (!) 

Ananich criticises the culture of the DEG., and very much echoes the task force report. 

Meegan 


From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 29, 2015 5:30 PM 

To: Holland, Meegan (GOV) < HoilandM2@nriichigan.gov >; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: Letter of resignation -- Wurfel 


From: Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 29, 2015 5:15 PM 
To: Winters, Jan (MCSC) 

Cc: Sygo, Jim (DEQ); Eyer, Tamara (DEQ); Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ); Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Subject: Letter of resignation -- Wurfel 

Ms. Winters, 

It has been an honor and a privilege to serve the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality as 
Communications Director for the past five years. 

I’m quite proud of countless accomplishments this team has achieved. 

However, I am tendering my two weeks’ notice, effective January 16, 2016. 

Thank you all for a great run. Best wishes in the new year, 
b 


Brad Wurfel 

Communications Director, 

Michigan Department of Environmental Quality 

wurfeib@rnichigan.gov 



l 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Thursday, December 31 , 201 5 7:47 AM 
Becker, Timothy (DHHS) 

RE: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 


Thanks for sharing that supplemental plan, Tim. 


And Happy New Year to everyone (Go Green!) 


Meegan 


From: Becker, Timothy (DHHS) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 11:35 PM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV) < b a i r d r ms c.bAR<!D.-i>. l QTC > ; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AiIOQ:L£^ Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

< I O ; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) < bT?J. I A 0^ .'iT: TT.-i 5=.bAf>.T! .0 ; Kelenske, Chris (MSP) 

< P.rS.c?y. > i Holland, Meegan (GOV) < HoMandM2@michigan.gov >: Murray, David (GOV) 

< : A f. .^?.m Af- =.t ISM 0 : S T': Vr* ) Redford, James (GOV) Creagh, Keith (DNR) 

< ^ Roberts, John (DTMB) <Rpbert.y9j®rm 

Cc: Etue, Kriste (MSP) <EtueK[©^ Lyon, Nick (DHHS) <j : y.Q.O. .(5TC0 IT: b. ( > 

Subject: RE: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 

Attached is a supplemental MDHHS advanced to S80 today (John: Farab sent to Nancy, Harkins, and team). This 
addresses surveillance, case management, and lead abatement in homes including pipes, it does not yet establish the 
long-term "health fund" some have advocated for. On the proposal document i concur with Director Creagh's and Mr. 
Bedford's suggestions on a slight re-wording of statement of need, I am comfortable with the general framework of the 
group. I agree with Captain Kelenske that the state needs to lead the group. I think with the Executive and MSP chairing 
the state is providing the requested prospective leadership. We have built in extensive participation from city, county, 
and subject matter experts and we 'will be completely transparent with all partners. 


From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, December 30, 2015 6:57 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <ATiC.Dj.(£l0liChLT9.D.-.EP.Y > ; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) Hollins, Harvey 

(GOV) <hpjijnsh^ Kelenske, Chris (MSP) <Kej.enskeC^.^jchJgan.gov>; Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

< b.0l!andM 2^.michi£an.gpy>; Murray, David (GOV) < M T AC .h 0 = FT ; Redford, James (GOV) 

< R fr)fT?.r.dJ.^S?.r?ri ic 0 1 JS Q : S J Becker, Timothy (DHHS) < beckertl@michigan.go y>; Creagh, Keith (DNR) 

<E.Cf!Mb. .k@.T.i!Tb.!Ei?.n.'.Rrj.v > ; Roberts, John (DTMB) < Ft FT P. ??. <§?. f.0A ffbf fi?M 0 

Cc: Etue, Kriste (MSP) < FT jeKgyTiiciTgan.gov>; Lyon, Nick (DHHS) <Ly.onj^ 

Subject: Attorney Client Work Product (Draft), Privileged and Confidential 

Team: 

Today Harvey and I met with the Flint Water Task Force. It was a good meeting. People were pleased with the G's 
statement from the prior day. Captain Kelenske joined us and we had a very good discussion about moving forward with 
the creation of the Flint Water Crisis Agency Coordinating Committee (FIACC). Tim Becker and Captain Kelenske 
provided me with a fair amount of input. I also read the City of Flint Incident Action Plan for a State of Emergency which 
Chris received today (enclosed for those who wish to read it as well). I have distilled all of this into a two page plan that I 
want your edits and comments on and a one page organizational chart (now presented in the "governor's colors" 
according to our fine people in Communications). Spoiler alert— I made Captain Kelenske Vice Chair of the whole 
shebang (with the Colonel's blessing) so Harvey wouldn't get lonely. 


l 



Here is my ask of you: 


1) Within 24 (sooner if you can) hours give me your comments and input 

2) Tomorrow I will turn around a final document for Jarrod to review with the Governor either New Year's Day or 
Saturday 

3) Ideally, Governor will approve Harvey sending it to Mayor Weaver Saturday (Sunday latest) 

4) Mayor needs to know that this is what the Governor wishes to discuss at the meeting January 7 along with 
financial resources that we still need some estimates on cost from DHHS for 

5) Meegan and Dave need to noodle how best to get out front with this and change the narrative focus on 
Monday's Genesee County declaration of emergency 

I know we are all working way too hard for what should be a rest and recharge period but I do appreciate everyone's 
efforts and I know the Boss really does as well. 

Regards, 

Rich 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 


Subject: 

Attachments: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Sunday, January 03, 2016 2:32 PM 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV); Clement, 

Elizabeth (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); 
Redford, James (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV) 

URGENT - DRAFT: FWIACC proposal 

FWIACC document v2.docx; IA Coord Com Org Chart 233264.pptx; FWIACC cover 
letter.docx 


Colleagues, 

Here is a cover letter, FWIACC plan and org chart. Harvey is planning on sending this to Mayor Karen Weaver today. 

If you have any feedback, please provide it immediately, since I'll be out of pocket starting at 3:15 p.m. (sorry for the late 
notice). 


Meegan 
Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 
Office: 517-335-6397 


Twitter: @meholland 


l 


DRAFT: A Proposal to Create the Flint Water Inter-Agency 
Coordinating Committee (FWIACC) 


Statement of Need 

To better coordinate resources and personnel and react with urgency, Harvey Hollins and MSP Capt. 
Chris Kelenske have been tasked with creating FWIACC, subject to the approval and endorsement by 
Flint Mayor Karen Weaver. 

We are also recommending, by executive order, that Gov. Rick Snyder authorizes this committee to help 
restore safe water in Flint and coordinate efforts addressing health/behavioral consequences from lead 
ingestion. 

This inter-agency group will fully engage with all stakeholders committed to solving Flint water issues. 
Equal partners. Equal leadership. Equal responsibility. Equal chance to be part of the solution to an 
important and not fully understood problem. 

FWIACC will be facilitated by Hollins and Kelenske, who represent statewide resources and 
constituencies, with support from senior members of the Governor's office. 

An overview of FWIACC's goals: 

• Create a routine information process between all parties. 

• Pursue other avenues of funding, including federal grants and legislative appropriations. 

• Implement without delay any appropriate mechanisms that are called for in the Emergency 
Management Act or the Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. These may include 
local emergency operations plans and guides. 

Action Plan 

Immediately, FWIACC will: 

1 . Establish an interagency workgroup described in the attached organizational chart. It will be 
comprised of DHHS, MDEQ, MSP, Treasury, Genesee County, City of Flint, MDE, LARA and external 
subject matter experts (SMEs). Other entities may be added as needed. Personnel must be goal- 
oriented, transparent with findings, and able to accomplish FWIACC Incident Action Plan items 
created by the state in a timely manner. The FWIACC plan would be created with city, county, state 
and federal needs in mind. 

2. Assemble staff with competencies in disaster/emergency planning, operations and finance as 
outlined under the National Incident Management System (NIMS). Staff will be accountable to the 
FWIACC leadership to track resource requests and document progress on the FWIACC incident 
action plan. 

3. Utilize the National Incident Management System and Unified/Incident Command as appropriate. 

4. Establish routine communications protocols at the operational, executive and legislative levels as 
determined appropriate. 

5. Establish interagency workgroup objectives using the following as a starting point. 



Interagency Workgroup Objectives 


1 . Determine and convey acceptable standards for potable water. 

■ Identify needed remediation. 

■ Convey the remediation plan objectives to all stakeholders and interested parties. 

■ Create logistics for distributing water and filters, particularly to homebound citizens. 

■ Implement the plan. 

2. Determine health impacts for the impacted population. 

■ Identify treatment methods, nutrition education and protocols for monitoring, 
neurodevelopmental screening, access to DBP specialists and 
psychologists/psychiatrists, expanded county services, etc. 

■ Convey the treatment plan objectives to interested parties. 

■ Implement the plan. 

3. Establish a public information protocol to effectively inform the community. 

■ Identify existing public information outlets within the city, county and state, 
including schools, churches and other formal and informal distribution networks. 

■ Establish a Joint Information Center. 

■ Provide for emergency alerts and updates. 

■ Determine the process for approving official information before it's disseminated. 

■ Convey to interested parties. 

4. Assess the status of the infrastructure and determine feasible actions to upgrade the water 
system. 

■ Determine current state of the infrastructure. 

■ Develop priorities, costs and potential funding sources for infrastructure upgrades 
as part of a long term recovery plan. 

■ Seek partners to assist (NGOs, Foundations, Business, etc.). 

■ Implement the plan. 











January 3, 2016 


To: Mayor Karen Weaver 
From: Harvey Hollins 

Governor Snyder and several members of his team do not believe we can wait for the necessary 
documentation for FEMA to act on any emergency declaration - and that an action plan should be fired 
up now by our State and Local entities and bring together agencies and stakeholders that need to 
communicate and coordinate more effectively regarding next steps and resources. 

Our working draft title is the Flint Water Inter-Agency Coordinating Committee (FWIACC), and it would 
immediately address ways at every level to restore safe water and monitor/mitigate the effects of the 
lead. 

In addition to Governor Snyder, the key officials working on this blueprint were MSP Capt. Chris 
Kelenske, DHHS Chief Deputy Tim Becker, DHHS Director Nick Lyon, Rich Baird and myself. The need for 
engaged central coordination has also been recommended by the Governor's Flint Water After-Action 
Task Force, of which Dr. Larry Reynolds is a member. Governor Snyder has endorsed this approach and 
has asked me to provide you with a draft copy in advance of your meeting with him on January 7. If you 
agree, we will organize this committee immediately, and the Governor will issue an executive order to 
authorize FWIACC to work on the issue for the long term . 

As you know, there is a significant amount of work to be done before the Federal government will 
approve an emergency declaration under the Emergency Management Act. FWIACC could begin its 
work immediately and would be in place to complement, not replace any action group ultimately 
formed by an emergency declaration. And we believe it would demonstrate how to best leverage 
essential support addressing manmade emergencies like this, since existing laws are more oriented 
toward natural disasters. 

We brainstormed who should be included in this initial emergency response, with the idea that you and 
other stakeholders may have recommendations on others who need to be added. 

You will note the organization chart and the proposal description is not a normal hierarchical entity. 

This is a collaborative, stakeholder-driven partnership. Chris and I would facilitate it, but it is a 
partnership of city, county and state viewpoints, and would include outside experts like Marc Edwards 
and Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha. 

All parties will be required to be transparent about their ideas and findings, agreeing to accountability 
measures and reporting on them on a regular basis. 

Please let me know your thoughts on this approach and also other agenda items you wish to see on 
January 7. If you agree, we would also invite the interim DEQ director, Keith Creagh, and the newly 
appointed spokesperson to meet you then. 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Monday, January 04, 2016 12:56 PM 
'Leix, Ron (MSP)' 

RE: My part of the statement 


Thanks - 111 put it all together with Dave M/s help and wiil get back to you' 
Meegan 


From: Leix, Ron (MSP) 

Sent: Monday, January 04, 2016 12:55 PM 
To: Holland, Meegan (GOV) < HoilandM2@triichlgan.gov > 
Cc: Banner, Shanon (MSP) < 8amterS@michigan.goy > 
Subject: RE: My part of the statement 

Hi Meegan, 

A quick overview about what takes place next. 

Thanks, 

Ron 

Ron Leix 

Public Information Officer (PIO) 

Emergency Management 

and Homeland Security Division 
Michigan State Police 
4000 Collins Road 
Lansing, Ml 48910 
TX: (517) 336-6464 



"A PROUD tradition of SERVICE through EXCELLENCE, INTEGRITY, and COURTESY" 



• The Michigan State Police, Emergency Management and Homeland Security Division is working with the 

Genesee County Emergency Management Coordinator to gather information about the resources needed for a 
Governor's declaration. 


l 



o The state police has been closely engaged in the situation since the beginning of this crisis, meeting with 
both county and city officials to guide them through the emergency management process. Due to the 
uniqueness of this situation, we have to look at all possible options to help Flint residents. 

• Beginning immediately, we're viewing this as an emergency and are not waiting to get moving on this problem. 
We're working closely with Mayor Weaver and other city and county officials to bring together state, county and 
city agencies and stakeholders to coordinate efforts and streamline communication. 


From: Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, January 04, 2016 11:52 AM 
To: Leix, Ron (MSP) 

Subject: My part of the statement 

Ron - quick overview of next steps and then.... 

But we aren't waiting for a declaration. We're viewing this as an emergency, regardless of whether it meets any legal 
definition. We believe we must not wait to get moving on this problem. We're working closely with Mayor Weaver and 
other city and county officials to bring together state, county and city agencies and stakeholders to coordinate efforts 
and streamline communication. 

Meegan Holland 

Director of Communications for Gov. Rick Snyder 
Office: 517-335-6397 



Twitter: @meholland 


2 





Subject: 

Location: 

FW: Internal Flint Water Meeting 
Executive Conference Room, 2nd Romney 

Start: 

End: 

Show Time As: 

Wed 1/28/2015 10:00 AM 
Wed 1/28/2015 11:00 AM 
Tentative 

Recurrence: 

(none) 

Meeting Status: 

Not yet responded 

Organizer: 

Posthumus, Dick (GOV) 


Original Appointment 

From: Posthumus, Dick (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, January 21, 2015 8:59 AM 

To: Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV); Wisniewski, 
Wendy (GOV); Hall, Jean (GOV); Pleyte, Beth (Treasury); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Clayton, Stacie (GOV); Hollins, 
Harvey (GOV); Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: Internal Flint Water Meeting 

When: Wednesday, January 28, 2015 10:00 AM-11 :00 AM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada). 

Where: Executive Conference Room, 2nd Romney 


Attending: 

Dick Posthumus 
Dennis Muchmore 
John Walsh 
Beth Clement 
Tom Saxton 
Harvey Hollins 
Dave Murray 


l 



From: Rich Baird 

Sent: Monday, December 28, 2015 9:48 AM 

To: Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: DRAFT: Flint communications plan 

Attachments: DRAFT Flint water communications plan.docx 


Sent from my Verizon 4G LTE Droid 

Forwarded message 

From: Meegan Holland 

Date: Dec 23, 2015 10:05 PM 

Subject: DRAFT: Flint communications plan 

To: Richard Baird 

Cc: 

Rich and Jarrod, 

Here is a communications plan to carry us through the next several days. 

Jarrod, Rich and I have gone over this and tweaked it. I would have sent you the original version but just now 
got your personal email. For now, we prefer to keep this plan offline. Please read this soon, because it kicks in 
tomorrow, as you'll see! 

Let me know if you have any questions. And Rich, I hope 1 incorporated all your suggestions. 

- Meegan 


Meegan Holland 



Twitter: @meholland 


l 






DRAFT: FLINT WATER PLAN 


Thursday, Dec. 24: Gov. calls Karen Weaver to set up a meeting 

Talking points: 

"I've read the draft of a report from the state's Office of the Auditor General and I've been briefed on 
the task force's progress in its ongoing investigation. 

"I want to work together with you to get this problem solved. As partners, we can get resources in place 
more quickly. 

"I want to assure you this isn't a political move on my part - I'm a problem solver and I intend to be your 
partner in addressing this to make it right. I'm truly sorry that all this has happened. 

"I have some ideas on how to get more resources for blood lead level testing and remediation - financial 
as well as state personnel, and I'd like to discuss those with you. 

"It sounds like you have a block of time available on the morning of Jan. 7. Would you be able to come 
to Lansing so we could talk between 9-10 a.m.? If so, I'll make sure Beth Emmitt, my scheduler, confirms 
with Maxine Murray." 

Saturday, Dec. 26, or Monday, Dec. 28: Getting organized 

We need to get the ball rolling on creating a healthy water communications team - potentially Mel 
Brown of TED and Ron Leix of MSP's Emergency Management and Homeland Security Division. Both are 
genuine and empathetic, and can convey information in a reassuring way. 

This duo would work with DHHS' and DEQ's respective communications teams, but also free up those 
teams to work on other issues not related to Flint water. The healthy water team would be the point 
people for anything concerning Flint water and lead issues, and will have the authority to assist Harvey 
Hollins, cut red tape for researchers who want access to DHHS and DEQ records, respond to media 
requests, edit and/or write press releases in conjunction with the Governor's communications team and 
more. 

Rich Baird or another appropriate person needs to discuss with Steve Arwood and Col. Etue about 
"borrowing" Mel and Ron. We would like to introduce these two at the January press conference with 
the Governor and Mayor Weaver, saying, "These are the folks who will answer questions and provide 
information to media and stakeholders about the Flint water crisis." 

Monday, Dec. 28, or Tuesday, Dec. 29: Asking researchers for help 

Nick Lyon reaches out to Virginia Tech researcher Marc Edwards and Hurley Hospital's Dr. Mona Hanna- 
Attisha to help state lead and water experts who have worked on Flint's issues. The purpose is to share 
information, compare results and track how those results were reached to ensure best practices and 
accurate reporting. 

We'd ask this of Edwards and Hanna-Attisha: 

Your research has been eye opening and we're hoping you'll be willing to join an effort to 
ensure Flint's water is safe. 



We'd like you to sit down with state epidemiologists and other researchers so you can discuss 
lead levels and other issues related to the Flint water crisis. There have been variances and we 
want to be as accurate as possible. 

We want you to have as much access to our data as is possible under HIPPA laws so we can 
determine the extent of the problem. 

We want the team to brainstorm ways to get Flint's water back to safe levels for drinking, and to 
help families learn how they can mitigate any effects from lead. 

Once the water is safe, we want your help in showing the people of Flint that their water is 
drinkable. 

If you're willing to help, we'd like to announce this at a press conference in January and would 
love to have you both attend, if possible. 

In addition, Capt. Chris Kelenske and/or Nick Lyon need to explore more ways to help Flint, including the 
idea of an imminent danger declaration. Has MSHDA explored HUD grants to help families who need to 
upgrade their service lines? Are there other resources we can draw from? 

Tuesday, Dec. 29: Governor releases statement on Flint water 

This statement is meant to manage expectations on the timing of the report (probably another month at 
least) and to signal that action may come sooner than that (the Jan. 4 changes and those to be 
announced at the press conference). 

"I've been briefed on the recent meeting of the task force studying the Flint water situation and I've 
read the report from the Office of the Auditor General on the processes used by DEQto monitor Flint 
water. 

"No matter what the testing requirements were, they were not enough to prevent this crisis. I want 
Michigan to be the state that is known for the safest water in the nation. 

"I'd like to thank the task force for keeping me apprised of their continuing investigation. As they 
uncover more facts, it's clear to me we can do better. The report may take another month or so, but if 
we need to make changes more swiftly, I plan to take immediate action. 

"The bottom line is we'll take responsibility for our part in Flint's water crisis. I'm committed to 
partnering with all of the stakeholders who are as concerned about public health as I am. I vow to make 
sure that Flint citizens will have safe drinking water. And I'm so very sorry that this happened. 

"But I know an apology isn't enough. We've already allocated $10 million to test the water, distribute 
water filters, and help in other ways. On Thursday, I called Flint Mayor Karen Weaver, and we're going 
to sit down in the next week to discuss other ways the state can offer assistance. 

"What happened in Flint is inexcusable. I want to assure residents there that we will work hard to make 
things right." 

Monday, Jan. 4- Personnel changes 

Dave Murray talking point: "I can't speak to the specifics, but yes, there have been changes in personnel 
at the DEQ. We'll announce soon who you can contact to get information about Flint's water situation. 
For now, you can call me." 

Thursday, Jan. 7 - Meeting between the Governor and Mayor Karen Weaver 



Governor's talking point: "We had a great meeting today. Mayor Weaver had some great ideas that we 
want to flesh out. We'll announce soon how we plan to move forward in solving the problems with Flint 
water." 

Possibly Jan. 11 or 13 - Press conference with the Governor and Mayor Weaver to announce action 
plan 

Also in attendance: Point person Harvey Hollins, Directors Nick Lyons and Dan Wyant, Capt. Chris 
Kelenske, Healthy Water communications team Mel Brown and Ron Leix, Sen. Jim Ananich, Rep. ???, 
Marc Edwards?, Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha, who else? 

Talking points: 

Weaver announces more state money to help Flint and talks about how she's encouraged by the 
Governor's action plan and looks forward to working with Harvey Hollins. 

Harvey briefly describes his role - as the boots on the ground in Flint and the coordinator for state 
resources. 

Gov. Snyder reiterates his sadness over the situation and says it calls for extraordinary measures, which 
the state is prepared to make: 

o The state will form a team of independent and state water and lead level experts to go 
over the various results. The team will include Virginia Tech's Marc Edwards and Hurley 
Hospital's Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha, along with state epidemiologists, DEQ experts, etc. 
o The team will have full access to DEQ. and DHHS records. 

o Mel Brown and Ron Leix will be the Healthy Water team and serve as point people for 
all things Flint water and lead levels. 

o The state is exploring the best options to provide more help for Flint, including an 
imminent danger declaration, HUD grants for infrastructure improvements, etc. 
o We will document what we learn from this experience to help other cities with 
water/lead issues. 



From: Hall, Jean (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, November 04, 2015 8:04 AM 

To: Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Subject: RE: DEQ Seeks Gov. Signature- Letter to EPA - Flint Safe Drinking Water POC - 

NEEDED BYTues. 11.10.15 


Good point. Thank you. 

Jean Hall 

Executive Assistant 

Office of Strategic Policy 

Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

H a I i i IS (Si m 1 eh iga n. gov 

517-241-5493 


From: Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, November 04, 2015 7:58 AM 
To: Hall, Jean (GOV) < hall il6raimichigan.gov' > 

Subject: RE: DEQ Seeks Gov. Signature- Letter to EPA - Flint Safe Drinking Water POC - NEEDED BY Tues. 11.10.15 

Looks fine to me, but given the subject matter I think you probably want to get a sign off from someone who has been 
plugged into this issue (Beth or Jarrod, I guess.) 


From: Hall, Jean (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, November 03, 2015 4:44 PM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Mcbride, Bill (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV) 

Cc: Scott, Allison (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Khouri, Claire (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Brown, Eric (GOV); 
Blackwell, Rob (GOV); Arwood, Cheri (GOV); Hansen, Rachel (GOV); Taylor, Nicole (GOV); Brownfield, Michael (GOV); 
Redford, James (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Thomet, Ruth (GOV); Stoken, Laura (GOV); Kennedy, Jordan (GOV); 
Lukasik, Liz (GOV); Weber, Travis (GOV); Ayers, Angela (GOV) 

Subject: DEQ Seeks Gov. Signature- Letter to EPA - Flint Safe Drinking Water POC - NEEDED BYTues. 11.10.15 
Hello All, 

DEQ is seeking the Governor’s signature on the attached letter to Dr. Susan Hedman, Regional 
Administrator, USEPA, Region 5. The letter designates Jim Sygo, Chief Deputy Director, MDEQ as 
the DEQ point person for the USEPA - Region 5 Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force. 

For your reference, DEQ provided the attached Transmittal Form , along with a copy of the October 
21 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update which includes a summary about the conference call with 
USEPA and MDEQ where the USEPA requested this letter. The attachment also includes the 
USEPA's October 16 press release about the establishment of the Task Force (see yellow highlighted 
text in both attachments) 

Your approval, input, and/or changes are needed by EOB by Tues. 11.10.15. 


i 



If you have any questions or need additional background information, please let me know. 
Thank you. 


Jean Hall 

Executive Assistant 


Office of Strategic Policy 

Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 


Lo^micbis: 


517 - 241-5493 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Murray, David (GOV) 

Thursday, November 19, 2015 7:52 PM 
Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Re: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 
image001.jpg 


Sent it to her separately. 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Nov 19, 2015, at 7:46 PM, Brownfield, Michael (GOV) < Brown field M 2 @ m i ch i aa n .go v > wrote: 

Hey Dave - Can you make sure Laura Stoken is on the distribution for talking points, etc., in case they 
get calls? 

Thanks! 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, November 19, 2015 7:09 PM 

To: Snyder, Rick (GOV); Calley, Brian (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); 
Redford, James (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV); 
Brownfield, Michael (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Mcbride, Bill (GOV) 

Subject: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 

Good evening Governor and team, 

We're working with the Department of Health and Human Services on its 
release of blood lead level testing results, with some continuing 
discussions about messaging and timing. I've attached the draft press 
release, an informational graphic and talking points. 

This is a challenging situation to be sure, but I think these results are fairly 
encouraging considering some of the heated rhetoric on this issue. We are 
discussing a "people first" approach to messaging, and perhaps issuing 
early next week rather than on at 9:30 a.m. on a Friday so it doesn't look 
like we are burying news. 

In a nutshell: 

■ Blood lead level testing results released today revealed that 24 of 963 
adults and children tested in Flint in October had elevated levels, 
according to the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services. 


l 




■ MDHHS is working closely with the Genesee County Health Department 

to reach out to families testing with higher levels and help them reduce 
their exposure to lead sources. 

■ Information was gathered from tests administered citywide to 963 

children and adults between October 1 and October 30. Eighteen 
people age 17 or younger had elevated blood lead levels. Six adults 
over the age 18 were identified with elevated blood lead levels. 

■ The testing and follow-up work is part of our action plan. 


Dave Murray 

Deputy Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 
517-335-6397, office 



Twitter:@michigandmurray 


<image001.jpg> 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Murray, David (GOV) 

Thursday, November 19, 2015 10:07 PM 
Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Re: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 


We need to come up with a better system of getting her info, because what we're doing now clearly isn't working. She 
also needs to be a little less confrontational. 

I'm working on building a better folder in the shared drive where we can throw things like points and backgrounders so 
everyone has access. 

We'll get there. 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Nov 19, 2015, at 8:09 PM, Brownfield, Michael (GOV) <8rovvnfiejdM?.@michigan,gov> wrote: 
cool! thanks! 

From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, November 19, 2015 7:51 PM 
To: Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Subject: Re: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 
Sent it to her separately. 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Nov 19, 2015, at 7:46 PM, Brownfield, Michael (GOV) < BrownfieidM2@michigan.gov > wrote: 

Hey Dave - Can you make sure Laura Stoken is on the distribution for talking points, etc., 
in case they get calls? 

Thanks! 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, November 19, 2015 7:09 PM 

To: Snyder, Rick (GOV); Calley, Brian (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); 
Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Forstner, Nathaniel 
(GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV); Brownfield, Michael (GOV); Wisniewski, 
Wendy (GOV); Mcbride, Bill (GOV) 

Subject: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 
Good evening Governor and team. 


l 





We're working with the Department of Health and Human 
Services on its release of blood lead level testing results, 
with some continuing discussions about messaging and 
timing. I've attached the draft press release, an 
informational graphic and talking points. 

This is a challenging situation to be sure, but I think these 
results are fairly encouraging considering some of the 
heated rhetoric on this issue. We are discussing a "people 
first" approach to messaging, and perhaps issuing early next 
week rather than on at 9:30 a.m. on a Friday so it doesn't 
look like we are burying news. 

In a nutshell: 

■ Blood lead level testing results released today revealed 

that 24 of 963 adults and children tested in Flint in 
October had elevated levels, according to the Michigan 
Department of Health and Human Services. 

■ MDHHS is working closely with the Genesee County 

Health Department to reach out to families testing with 
higher levels and help them reduce their exposure to 
lead sources. 

■ Information was gathered from tests administered 

citywide to 963 children and adults between October 1 
and October 30. Eighteen people age 17 or younger had 
elevated blood lead levels. Six adults over the age 18 
were identified with elevated blood lead levels. 

■ The testing and follow-up work is part of our action plan. 


Dave Murray 

Deputy Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 
517-335-6397, office 


Twitter:@michigandmurray 

<image001.jpg> 


2 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, December 03, 2015 1:05 PM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Mcbride, Bill (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV); 

Brownfield, Michael (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Calley, 
Brian (GOV); Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV) 

Subject: Flint water release today 

Attachments: Flint EBL Data Press Release V9.docx; Comms Plan - Flint EBL Data Summary 

12315.docx; Flint Blood Lead Level Summary Report Dec.pdf 


Team, 

DHHS is sending out this update on Flint blood lead testing this afternoon. Preliminary data indicates that 30 of 
1,361 adults and children tested in Flint since October 1 had elevated blood lead levels, according to a report 
issued today by the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services. 

We've worked with the folks there to make the release as reader friendly and people focused as possible, and 
also to show some historical context. The graph on the PDF is particularly effective, showing that levels were 
just as high in 2010. 

Please share any concerns you may have. 

Dave 


l 



RICK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 


State of Michigan 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 

Lansing 


nick LYON 

DIRECTOR 


FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE CONTACT: Jennifer Eisner 

December 3, 2015 (517)241-2112 

MDHHS releases latest data outlining blood lead levels in Flint 

Follow-up care , case management resources continue for families 

LANSING, Mich. - Preliminary data indicates that 30 of 1,361 adults and children tested in Flint 
since October 1 had elevated blood lead levels, according to a report issued today by the 
Michigan Department of Health and Human Services. 

This marks the first summary report on lead testing called for in the state’s action plan related to 
health concerns about Flint’s water infrastructure. 

“Our goal is to help families reduce their exposure to lead sources,” said Dr. Eden Wells, 
MDHHS chief medical executive. “We have made progress in testing and identifying those with 
elevated blood lead levels, and the department will continue to work closely with the Genesee 
County Health Department to reach these families. We will remain diligent in our ongoing 
outreach and education efforts.” 

Information comes from tests administered citywide to 1,361 children and adults since October 
1. Tests showed that 21 of 969 children age 17 or younger and 9 of 392 adults over the age 18 
were identified with elevated blood lead levels. 

The report covers test results reported to MDHHS since the state action plan was put in place 
Oct. 2. It includes the number of tests and number of elevated blood lead levels greater than 5 
micrograms per deciliter, and captures both capillary and venous blood tests that have been 
reported to MDHHS since the beginning of October. People who have had multiple tests are 
counted only once. Five micrograms per deciliter is the level that the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention considers elevated and triggers health care professional follow up with families. 

The full report is posted online at www. michi gan, go v/flint water and will be updated as more 
data becomes available. 

When reviewing historical trend data, the risk of lead exposure is highest during the third quarter 
of each year - July through September. Seasonal variation is the result of a number of factors 
including increased exposure to lead in dust and soil in the summer months. 

In the third quarter of 2010, 8.3 percent of Flint children 6 and under showed elevated blood lead 
levels. The figure gradually decreased to 4. 1 percent in the third quarter of 2013. During the 
same months in 2014, the figure increased to 7.5 percent and decreased to 6.4 percent in the third 
quarter of 2015. 


MORE 



Page 2 of 2 


Last month, MDHHS collaborated with the county health department and local partners to 
distribute educational resources and informational letters to Flint parents regarding lead testing. 
The state is providing funding for GCFCD nurses to work with families when an elevated blood 
lead level has been detected. During these follow-up visits, nurses coordinate with environmental 
health investigators to meet with families in their homes to identify lead exposures, address 
questions and provide water filters. People can be exposed to lead from paint, soil, plumbing and 
other sources. 

MDHHS continues to provide free water filters and replacement cartridges to Flint residents at 
four locations, including the MDF1HS Flint offices and the Genesee County Community Action 
Resource Department. For a full list of locations and hours of distribution, visit 

www.michigan.gov/flintwater . 


To help residents properly install water filters, and to demonstrate how to replace the original 
when it expires, MDHHS has created an instructional video on its YouTube channel . For 
updates, visit www. michi gan. gov/flintwater . 


### 


201 TOWNSEND STREET • LANSING, MICHIGAN 48913 
vwwv.michigan.gov/mdhhs • 517-373-3740 


MDHHS CV Lthd (4-15) MS Word 





Flint EBL Data Summary 

Communications Plan 


Purpose 

To release elevated blood lead level data for the city of Flint and communicate the summary to 
our partners in the community as well as local and state media. The report is intended to 
inform residents about blood lead level testing efforts in Flint and provide preliminary 
cumulative numbers on an ongoing basis. 

Communications Timeline - December 3, 2015 

11 a.m. 

• Send final release and summary report to Governor's office, Michigan Department 
of Environmental Quality 

1:30 p.m. 

• Send final embargoed release and summary report to: 

o Genesee County Health Department - Geralyn Lasher 
o Dr. Mona Hannah-Attisha - Geralyn Lasher 
o Task Force Members - Geralyn Lasher 
o City of Flint Mayor's Office - Geralyn Lasher 
o Congress and legislature - Elizabeth Hertel 


2 p.m. 

• Issue press release and summary report 

• Post press release and summary report to MDHHS website newsroom and Flint 
Water website, www.michigan.gov/flintwater 


3 p.m. 

• Pitched media interviews with Dr. Eden Wells: 
o Ron Fonger, MLive 
o Kristi Tanner, Detroit Free Press 
o Robin Erb, Detroit Free Press 
o Steve Carmody, Michigan Radio 

MDHHS Contacts - Office N umber 517-241-21 12 

• Geralvn Lasher, cell 

• Angela Minicuci, cell - J 

• Jennifer Eisner, cell -Br™ 



Summary as of November 13, 2015 


Executive Summary 

This report is generated by MDHHS to track 

Blood Lead Level test results in Flint, 

Michigan. 

• Counts on this report include both 
capillary and venous blood test s. People 
who have had multiple tests are counted 
only once per year. 

• Since 10/1/2015, an additional 1,361 
people have been tested in Flint. 

• Continued testing efforts 

by Genesee County Health Department, 
MDHHS and focal medical personnel 
have identified 21 children with blood 
lead levels greater than or equal to 
5pg/dL (micrograms per deciliter) since 
10/1/2015. 

• Three percent of the children younger 
than 6 years old tested since 10/1/2015 
have had blood lead levels greater than 
or equal to Spg/dt 

• Additional testing is ongoing. Counts 
will vary as new results are added. 


Incidence of elevated blood lead > ~ 5 mcg/di among children < 6 
years of age by quarter, 2.010- 2015 







Deduplicated by year, retains test during the time period. 
*Data for Q4 2015 are incomplete 


* Data for Quarter 4 of 2015 are incomplete and subject to change 






Children younger than 6 Years Old 

Michigan 

Genesee 

County 

Flint 

48501-48507 

152,608 

6,932 

3,560 

9,509 

298 

222 

149,420 

6,667 

3,093 

7,392 

250 

180 

146,142 

7,008 

3,112 

6,704 

206 

127 

145,813 

6,986 

3,077 

5,647 

156 

95 

141,355 

6,690 

3,045 

4,948 

178 

122 

120,699 

5,778 

2,704 

4,200 

149 

101 

14,593 

957 

560 

583 

22 

15 


Michigan 


17,963 


907 


15,725 


651 


15,460 


478 


13,897 


342 


12,936 


386 


10,841 


309 


1,412 


38 


Children 6 to 17 Years Old 


Genesee Flint 

County 48501-48507 


867 


25 


1,038 


20 


1,386 


17 


1,241 


9 


913 


6 


1,197 


10 


502 


6 


* Data for Quarter 4 of 2015 are incomplete and subject to change 





































































































Adults 18 Years and Older 

Total Number of People of All Ages Tested 


Michigan 

Genesee 

County 

Flint 

48501-48507 

Michigan 

Genesee 

County 

Flint 

48501-48507 

Total tested for lead 
1/1/2010 to 12/31/2010: 

13,853 

602 

195 

184,424 

8,401 

4,218 


1,462 

42 

18 

11,878 

365 

260 


13,259 

542 

139 

178,404 

8,247 

2,726 

dumber of test results >5p.g/dL 
1/1/2011 to 12/31/11: 

1,369 

44 

16 

9,412 

314 

211 


13,059 

556 

155 

174,661 

8,950 

3,907 

Number of test results >5|ig/dL 
1/1/2012 to 12/31/12: 

1,415 

33 

11 

8,597 

256 

150 

Total tested for lead 
1/1/2013 to 12/31/2013: 

12,199 

498 

136 

171,909 

8,725 

3,779 

Number of test results >Spg/dL 
1/1/2013 to 12/31/13: 

1,499 

54 

16 

7,488 

219 

115 

Total tested for lead 
1/1/2014 to 12/31/2014: 

12,684 

441 

112 

166,975 

8,044 

3,585 

Number of test results >5p.g/dl 
l/l/2014to 12/31/14: 

1,422 

44 

12 

6,756 

228 

139 

—BUS— 

11,685 

860 

526 

143,225 

7,835 

3,995 

Number of test results >Sgig/dt 
1/1/2015 to 11/13/2015: 

1,195 

30 

15 

5,704 

204 

124 


1,615 

483 

392 

17,620 

1,942 

1,361 

Number of test results >Sgig/dt 
20/1/2015 to 11/13/2015: 

160 

11 

9 

781 

44 

30 


* Data for Quarter 4 of 2015 are incomplete and subject to change 






































































































From: Hall, Jean (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, November 04, 2015 8:04 AM 

To: Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Subject: RE: DEQ Seeks Gov. Signature- Letter to EPA - Flint Safe Drinking Water POC - 

NEEDED BYTues. 11.10.15 


Good point. Thank you. 

Jean Hall 

Executive Assistant 

Office of Strategic Policy 

Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

H a I i i IS (Si m 1 eh iga n. gov 

517-241-5493 


From: Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, November 04, 2015 7:58 AM 
To: Hall, Jean (GOV) < hall il6raimichigan.gov' > 

Subject: RE: DEQ Seeks Gov. Signature- Letter to EPA - Flint Safe Drinking Water POC - NEEDED BY Tues. 11.10.15 

Looks fine to me, but given the subject matter I think you probably want to get a sign off from someone who has been 
plugged into this issue (Beth or Jarrod, I guess.) 


From: Hall, Jean (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, November 03, 2015 4:44 PM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Mcbride, Bill (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV) 

Cc: Scott, Allison (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Khouri, Claire (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Brown, Eric (GOV); 
Blackwell, Rob (GOV); Arwood, Cheri (GOV); Hansen, Rachel (GOV); Taylor, Nicole (GOV); Brownfield, Michael (GOV); 
Redford, James (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Thomet, Ruth (GOV); Stoken, Laura (GOV); Kennedy, Jordan (GOV); 
Lukasik, Liz (GOV); Weber, Travis (GOV); Ayers, Angela (GOV) 

Subject: DEQ Seeks Gov. Signature- Letter to EPA - Flint Safe Drinking Water POC - NEEDED BYTues. 11.10.15 
Hello All, 

DEQ is seeking the Governor’s signature on the attached letter to Dr. Susan Hedman, Regional 
Administrator, USEPA, Region 5. The letter designates Jim Sygo, Chief Deputy Director, MDEQ as 
the DEQ point person for the USEPA - Region 5 Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force. 

For your reference, DEQ provided the attached Transmittal Form , along with a copy of the October 
21 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update which includes a summary about the conference call with 
USEPA and MDEQ where the USEPA requested this letter. The attachment also includes the 
USEPA's October 16 press release about the establishment of the Task Force (see yellow highlighted 
text in both attachments) 

Your approval, input, and/or changes are needed by EOB by Tues. 11.10.15. 


i 



If you have any questions or need additional background information, please let me know. 
Thank you. 


Jean Hall 

Executive Assistant 


Office of Strategic Policy 

Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 


Lo^micbis: 


517 - 241-5493 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Murray, David (GOV) 

Thursday, November 19, 2015 7:52 PM 
Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Re: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 
image001.jpg 


Sent it to her separately. 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Nov 19, 2015, at 7:46 PM, Brownfield, Michael (GOV) < Brown field M 2 @ m i ch i aa n .go v > wrote: 

Hey Dave - Can you make sure Laura Stoken is on the distribution for talking points, etc., in case they 
get calls? 

Thanks! 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, November 19, 2015 7:09 PM 

To: Snyder, Rick (GOV); Calley, Brian (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); 
Redford, James (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV); 
Brownfield, Michael (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Mcbride, Bill (GOV) 

Subject: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 

Good evening Governor and team, 

We're working with the Department of Health and Human Services on its 
release of blood lead level testing results, with some continuing 
discussions about messaging and timing. I've attached the draft press 
release, an informational graphic and talking points. 

This is a challenging situation to be sure, but I think these results are fairly 
encouraging considering some of the heated rhetoric on this issue. We are 
discussing a "people first" approach to messaging, and perhaps issuing 
early next week rather than on at 9:30 a.m. on a Friday so it doesn't look 
like we are burying news. 

In a nutshell: 

■ Blood lead level testing results released today revealed that 24 of 963 
adults and children tested in Flint in October had elevated levels, 
according to the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services. 


l 




■ MDHHS is working closely with the Genesee County Health Department 

to reach out to families testing with higher levels and help them reduce 
their exposure to lead sources. 

■ Information was gathered from tests administered citywide to 963 

children and adults between October 1 and October 30. Eighteen 
people age 17 or younger had elevated blood lead levels. Six adults 
over the age 18 were identified with elevated blood lead levels. 

■ The testing and follow-up work is part of our action plan. 

Dave Murray 

Deputy Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

M LE ^ rDAft b j g _ar. go y 

Twitter:@michigandmurray 

<image001.jpg> 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Murray, David (GOV) 

Thursday, November 19, 2015 10:07 PM 
Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Re: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 


We need to come up with a better system of getting her info, because what we're doing now clearly isn't working. She 
also needs to be a little less confrontational. 

I'm working on building a better folder in the shared drive where we can throw things like points and backgrounders so 
everyone has access. 

We'll get there. 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Nov 19, 2015, at 8:09 PM, Brownfield, Michael (GOV) <8rovvnfiejdM?.@michigan,gov> wrote: 
cool! thanks! 

From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, November 19, 2015 7:51 PM 
To: Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Subject: Re: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 
Sent it to her separately. 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Nov 19, 2015, at 7:46 PM, Brownfield, Michael (GOV) < BrownfieidM2@michigan.gov > wrote: 

Hey Dave - Can you make sure Laura Stoken is on the distribution for talking points, etc., 
in case they get calls? 

Thanks! 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, November 19, 2015 7:09 PM 

To: Snyder, Rick (GOV); Calley, Brian (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); 
Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Forstner, Nathaniel 
(GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV); Brownfield, Michael (GOV); Wisniewski, 
Wendy (GOV); Mcbride, Bill (GOV) 

Subject: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 
Good evening Governor and team. 


l 





We're working with the Department of Health and Human 
Services on its release of blood lead level testing results, 
with some continuing discussions about messaging and 
timing. I've attached the draft press release, an 
informational graphic and talking points. 

This is a challenging situation to be sure, but I think these 
results are fairly encouraging considering some of the 
heated rhetoric on this issue. We are discussing a "people 
first" approach to messaging, and perhaps issuing early next 
week rather than on at 9:30 a.m. on a Friday so it doesn't 
look like we are burying news. 

In a nutshell: 

■ Blood lead level testing results released today revealed 

that 24 of 963 adults and children tested in Flint in 
October had elevated levels, according to the Michigan 
Department of Health and Human Services. 

■ MDHHS is working closely with the Genesee County 

Health Department to reach out to families testing with 
higher levels and help them reduce their exposure to 
lead sources. 

■ Information was gathered from tests administered 

citywide to 963 children and adults between October 1 
and October 30. Eighteen people age 17 or younger had 
elevated blood lead levels. Six adults over the age 18 
were identified with elevated blood lead levels. 

■ The testing and follow-up work is part of our action plan. 


Dave Murray 

Deputy Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 
517-335-6397, office 



Twitter:@michigandmurray 


<image001.jpg> 


2 



From: Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, November 04, 2015 7:58 AM 

To: Hall, Jean (GOV) 

Subject: RE: DEQ Seeks Gov. Signature- Letter to EPA - Flint Safe Drinking Water POC - 

NEEDED BYTues. 11.10.15 


Looks fine to me, but given the subject matter I think you probably want to get a sign off from someone who has been 
plugged into this issue (Beth or Jarrod, I guess.) 


From: Hall, Jean (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, November 03, 2015 4:44 PM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Mcbride, Bill (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV) 

Cc: Scott, Allison (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Khouri, Claire (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Brown, Eric (GOV); 
Blackwell, Rob (GOV); Arwood, Cheri (GOV); Hansen, Rachel (GOV); Taylor, Nicole (GOV); Brownfield, Michael (GOV); 
Redford, James (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Thomet, Ruth (GOV); Stoken, Laura (GOV); Kennedy, Jordan (GOV); 
Lukasik, Liz (GOV); Weber, Travis (GOV); Ayers, Angela (GOV) 

Subject: DEQ Seeks Gov. Signature- Letter to EPA - Flint Safe Drinking Water POC - NEEDED BY Tues. 11.10.15 
Hello All, 

DEQ is seeking the Governor’s signature on the attached letter to Dr. Susan Hedman, Regional 
Administrator, USEPA, Region 5. The letter designates Jim Sygo, Chief Deputy Director, MDEQ as 
the DEQ point person for the USEPA - Region 5 Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force. 

For your reference, DEQ provided the attached Transmittal Form , along with a copy of the October 
21 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update which includes a summary about the conference call with 
USEPA and MDEQ where the USEPA requested this letter. The attachment also includes the 
USEPA's October 16 press release about the establishment of the Task Force (see yellow highlighted 
text in both attachments) 

Your approval, input, and/or changes are needed by EOB by Tues. 11.10.15. 

If you have any questions or need additional background information, please let me know. 

Thank you. 


Jean Hall 

Executive Assistant 

Office of Strategic Policy 

Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

Halil 1 5 @ ro i c h i ga n . gov 

517-241-5493 


l 




From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Thursday, November 19, 2015 7:46 PM 
Murray, David (GOV) 

RE: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 


Hey Dave - Can you make sure Laura Stoken is on the distribution for talking points, etc., in case they get calls? 
Thanks! 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, November 19, 2015 7:09 PM 

To: Snyder, Rick (GOV); Calley, Brian (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Redford, James 
(GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); 
Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV); Brownfield, Michael (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy 
(GOV); Mcbride, Bill (GOV) 

Subject: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 
Good evening Governor and team, 

We're working with the Department of Health and Human Services on its release of blood 
lead level testing results, with some continuing discussions about messaging and timing. 

I've attached the draft press release, an informational graphic and talking points. 

This is a challenging situation to be sure, but I think these results are fairly encouraging 
considering some of the heated rhetoric on this issue. We are discussing a "people first" 
approach to messaging, and perhaps issuing early next week rather than on at 9:30 a.m. 
on a Friday so it doesn't look like we are burying news. 

In a nutshell: 

■ Blood lead level testing results released today revealed that 24 of 963 adults and 

children tested in Flint in October had elevated levels, according to the Michigan 
Department of Health and Human Services. 

■ MDHHS is working closely with the Genesee County Health Department to reach out to 

families testing with higher levels and help them reduce their exposure to lead 
sources. 

■ Information was gathered from tests administered citywide to 963 children and adults 

between October 1 and October 30. Eighteen people age 17 or younger had elevated 
blood lead levels. Six adults over the age 18 were identified with elevated blood lead 
levels. 

■ The testing and follow-up work is part of our action plan. 


l 




Dave Murray 

Deputy Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

Murr3vDl@michigan.gov 

Twitter:@michigandmurray 






From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Thursday, November 19, 2015 8:10 PM 
Murray, David (GOV) 

RE: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 


cool! thanks! 

From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, November 19, 2015 7:51 PM 
To: Brownfield, Michael (GOV) 

Subject: Re: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 
Sent it to her separately. 

Sent from my iPhone 


On Nov 19, 2015, at 7:46 PM, Brownfield, Michael (GOV) <BrownfieidM2 @m ich iga n.g o v> wrote: 

Hey Dave - Can you make sure Laura Stoken is on the distribution for talking points, etc., in case they 
get calls? 

Thanks! 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, November 19, 2015 7:09 PM 

To: Snyder, Rick (GOV); Calley, Brian (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); 
Redford, James (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV); 
Brownfield, Michael (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Mcbride, Bill (GOV) 

Subject: Information about Flint blood lead level testing results release 

Good evening Governor and team. 

We're working with the Department of Health and Human Services on its 
release of blood lead level testing results, with some continuing 
discussions about messaging and timing. I've attached the draft press 
release, an informational graphic and talking points. 

This is a challenging situation to be sure, but I think these results are fairly 
encouraging considering some of the heated rhetoric on this issue. We are 
discussing a "people first" approach to messaging, and perhaps issuing 
early next week rather than on at 9:30 a.m. on a Friday so it doesn't look 
like we are burying news. 

In a nutshell: 


l 




■ Blood lead level testing results released today revealed that 24 of 963 

adults and children tested in Flint in October had elevated levels, 
according to the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services. 

■ MDHHS is working closely with the Genesee County Health Department 

to reach out to families testing with higher levels and help them reduce 
their exposure to lead sources. 

■ Information was gathered from tests administered citywide to 963 

children and adults between October 1 and October 30. Eighteen 
people age 17 or younger had elevated blood lead levels. Six adults 
over the age 18 were identified with elevated blood lead levels. 

■ The testing and follow-up work is part of our action plan. 


Dave Murray 

Deputy Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

MyrrayPIjgMchigaa.£oy 

517-335-6397, office 



Twitter:@michigandmurray 


<image001.jpg> 


2 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Thursday, October 01, 2015 5:52 PM 
Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

Re: Friday media briefings 


Add link. Always better to do it that way 
Sent from my iPhone 

On Oct 1, 2015, at 5:50 PM, Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DjcklnsonS@michiR3n.Rov > wrote: 
Just add in the link or should I puli the bio info and add to briefing 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 01, 2015 5:48 PM 
To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) <DickinspnS(®m 
Subject: RE: Friday media briefings 

If you could also add in this bio link for Dr. Wells -don't believe Governor has met her yet. New CME as 
of this spring. 

MDEIHS Names Eden V. Wells, M.D., M.P.H. as Michigan's New Chief Medical Executive 

htt o : // www.mich iaa n .gov/som/0.4669.7-19?.-29942 3 4762 -353S42~,00.htm i 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 01, 2015 5:45 PM 

To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) <Djckj.p.sop_S^.rvijchjgan.goy> 

Cc: Emmitt, Beth (GOV) < e m CO ATlt.b.^?.0n 1.0:12 ISM iS FT: ; Bedan, Morgan (GOV) <B .Si' .0.1 j.V.bJ. ^ 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <Mff.0:L(^.01fC.b.iE3.D.'.RQ l .Y>; Murray, David (GOV) <M.yrraxP.l.^nijchJg«3n.gov>; Biehl, 
Laura (GOV) < B.i.e h j. j : n.l I.Ob.l .¥>; Paciorek, Josh (GOV) <Eaciprej^ Kennedy, Jordan 

(GOV) Brown, Jessica (GOV) <BrownJ53^ 

Subject: RE: Friday media briefings 
Importance: High 

Here are the two media briefings for tomorrow. Holier if have any Qs or need anything else at all. 


From: Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 01, 2015 5:23 PM 
To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wurfej^ 

Subject: Friday media briefings 

Importance: High 

RDS/Dan Wyant/Nick Lyon/Dr. Eden Wells/JA/SW- LIVE conference call with media regarding Flint 
water comprehensive action plan 

DATE: Friday, Oct. 2, 2015 

Time: 8:15-8:40 a.m. PST (11:15-11:40 AM EST) 


l 



Location: Via phone from San Fran 
RDS to call: 832-225-5881,23453839# 


• Call right at 8:15 a.m.; Call will be live immediately. SW will introduce you, the other participants 
and open it up for your opening remarks. 

• Other participants will be Dan Wyant, DEQ Director; Nick Lyon, DHHS Director; and Dr. Eden Wells, 
Ml's Chief Medical Executive 

• SW will moderate and screen reporter questions. 

Purpose: Media conference call to discuss Flint water comprehensive action plan 

Possible Topics: 

Flint water action plan 
Lead in Flint water 
Handling of Flint Water issue 
Reconnecting Flint to Detroit water 

Media invited: 

Flint area media (print, TV and radio) - Flint Journal/Ron Fonger; WJRT TV 12, WNEM TV 5, WEYI TV 25, 
WFNT Radio 

Associated Press - Ed White 
Detroit News - Jim Lynch 

Detroit Free Press - Nancy Kaffer, Kristi Tanner & Kathy Gray 
Michigan Radio - Steve Carmody 

Agenda: 

11:15-11:16 AM SW intro; sets parameters; introduces other participants; turns over to Gov for 

opening remarks 

11:16-11:21 AM Governor gives opening remarks; highlights the key steps in the action plan 

11:22-11:37 AM Governor opens up for Q&A, weaving in Departmental experts as necessary 

and needed 

11:37-11:39 AM Governor gives closing remarks 

11:39 AM SW wraps up call; reminds reporters of embargo, 1:30 p.m. press conference 

and how to get a hold of everyone 

Recent Articles: 

Freep: Legislators take action to fix Flint water supply- 

suppiv/73152.540/ 

WDIV: Public health emergency declared due to lead in Flint water- 

htfcp://www.clickondetroitcorri/news/pubiic-hK3ith“ememencv-ded3red-due-tO"lead-in"fjirst" 



2 




RDS/JA - LIVE Radio interview with Frank Beckmann on WJR Radio 


Date: Friday, Oct. 2, 2015 
Time: 8:45-8:55 a.m. PST 


Location: Via phone 
RDS to call: 313-875-4480 


Purpose: To discuss priorities and key issues you are working on in 2015. 


Possible Topics: 

• Roads 

• DPS reform plans 

• Focus/priorities for remainder of the year 

• Flint Water 

• New Supreme Court Justice 

• BLM Ambassador Trip to California 

• Detroit homecoming 

• Amazon and Lear investments this week 

• China President visits/trade mission 

• Rising Tide initiative w/ TED 


Recent articles: 

Freep: Snyder appoints Joan Larsen to Supreme Court- 

hltp://www.jansinj3!St3teiournai.com/story/news/poiit;cs/201S./0§/30/u-m-attorriey-headed-michigatv 


supreme ■court/7'iQg3044/ 

AP: Michigan in early talks on taking more Syria, Middle East refugees, Snyder says- 

hLtp:/VVv'wvv.crainsdetro:t.cprn/ar[icie/201S0329/NEWS01/15092979S/rriichiga;v;n-early-l3lks-on- 
Laking-more -syria-middle- east-refugees 

WILX: Governor Snyder Says Road Talks Going Well- http://www.wiix.com/home/headlines/Governor 
Snyder- -Says- -Road -Taiks-Going- Well- 330164301. htmi 

AP: Snyder acknowledges some mistakes in tapping Flint River- 


Note: 

• Frank Beckmann will be broadcasting remotely from northern Michigan this day. Congressman John 
Moolenaar will be the guest immediately before the Governor. 

Last interview: 5/28/15 at Mackinac 

Market: Southeast Michigan- online at wjr.com 

Contact: Studio: 313-875-4480; Back-up Producer Terri Leib celhBlSBBfiBBfi 


3 



To: 

Subject: 


Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

RE: Friday media briefings 


Hiiiiii add the link to the briefing though or in the appointment 


From: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 01, 2015 5:52 PM 

To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) <DickinsonS@michigan.gov> 

Subject: Re: Friday media briefings 

Add link. Always better to do it that way 

Sent from my iPhone 


On Oct 1, 2015, at 5:50 PM, Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < PickinsonS@michigan.gov > wrote: 


Just add in the link or should I pull the bio info and add to briefing 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 01, 2015 5:48 PM 

To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) <DlckinsonSfgmichigan.gov> 

Subject: RE: Friday media briefings 

If you could also add in this bio link for Dr. Wells -don't believe Governor has met her yet. New CME as 
of this spring. 


MDFIFIS Names Eden V. Wells, M.D., M.P.FI. as Michigan's New Chief Medical Executive 

htt o:// www,mich iga n, gov/som/0,4669.7-:l.92-?.9S42 34762-353542-.0G.html 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 01, 2015 5:45 PM 

To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) <DickinsonS@michiR3n.goy> 

Cc: Emmitt, Beth (GOV) < emmittb@m i chigan.goy >; Bedan, Morgan (GOV) <Bed5nM@mlchig3n.gov>; 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < A ge n J @ rn i eh iga n . gov >; Murray, David (GOV) <Mun'ayD:l.@michigan.gov>; Biehl, 
Laura (GOV) <BiehlL@rnichig3n.gov>; Paciorek, Josh (GOV) <P3doreki@michigan.gov>; Kennedy, Jordan 
(GOV) <KonnsdvM Brown, Jessica (GOV) <Bro^ 

Subject: RE: Friday media briefings 
Importance: High 

Here are the two media briefings for tomorrow. Holler if have any Qs or need anything else at all. 


From: Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 01, 2015 5:23 PM 
To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wurf els@rn ichig3n.gov> 

Subject: Friday media briefings 

Importance: High 

RDS/Dan Wyant/Nick Lyon/Dr. Eden Wells/JA/SW- LIVE conference call with media regarding Flint 
water comprehensive action plan 



DATE: Friday, Oct. 2, 2015 

Time: 8:15-8:40 a.m. PST (11:15-11:40 AM EST) 

Location: Via phone from San Fran 
RDS to call: 832-225-5881,23453839# 

• Call right at 8:15 a.m.; Call will be live immediately. SW will introduce you, the other participants and 
open it up for your opening remarks. 

• Other participants will be Dan Wyant, DEQ Director; Nick Lyon, DH HS Director; and Dr. Eden Wells, 
Ml's Chief Medical Executive 

• SW will moderate and screen reporter questions. 

Purpose: Media conference call to discuss Flint water comprehensive action plan 

Possible Topics: 

Flint water action plan 
Lead in Flint water 
Handling of Flint Water issue 
Reconnecting Flint to Detroit water 

Media invited: 

Flint area media (print, TV and radio) - Flint Journal/Ron Fonger; WJRTTV 12, WNEM TV 5, WEYI TV 25, 
WFNT Radio 

Associated Press - Ed White 
Detroit News - Jim Lynch 

Detroit Free Press - Nancy Kaffer, Kristi Tanner & Kathy Gray 
Michigan Radio - Steve Carmody 

Agenda: 

11:15-11:16 AM SW intro; sets parameters; introduces other participants; turns over to Gov for 

opening remarks 

11:16-11:21 AM Governor gives opening remarks; highlights the key steps in the action plan 

11:22-11:37 AM Governor opens up for Q&A, weaving in Departmental experts as necessary 

and needed 

11:37-11:39 AM Governor gives closing remarks 

11:39 AM SW wraps up call; reminds reporters of embargo, 1:30 p.m. press conference 

and how to get a hold of everyone 


Recent Articles: 

Freep: Legislators take action to fix Flint water supply- 

http://www.fresi;i.com/sl:ory/news/poiitics/201S/10/01/iee:siator3--take--action--fix-flir'4i:-vvater-- 


s u p p 1 y/73 1 5 2 540/ 

WDIV: Public health emergency declared due to lead in Flint water- 

http:/7www,cHckondetroit.com/news/pubNc-he3ith-enierR&ncy-decl3red-due-to-jead-in-flint- 

W3fer/35S016?0 


Mlive: Governor says fallout from Flint water switch wasn't fully understood- 

htf p ://wvvvv. mi iv e. corn/news/ f ii nt/i ndex. gsf/ 20.15/ 09/sny d&r s ays he hel psd bri n g vva . htm \ 

Freep: Snyder finally says lead in Flint water may be problem- 

htt p :/7www.fre ep .com/story/opinion/coiumnists/n3ncy-kaffer/201 5/ 09/3 Q/ time- g ov-sa y s-le3t 


W3ter-may-probjem/7308866 6/ 

Mlive: Legislative Black Caucus urges state of emergency for Flint water- 

http: //wvvw.miiv e.com/ new s/ fiint/inde x. ssf/2015/09/nrtich g 3ns bla ck causus ur ges go. htm I 


int- 


Market: Statewide 



Contact: Conference line: 832-225-5881,23453839# 


RDS/JA - LIVE Radio interview with Frank Beckmann on WJR Radio 

Date: Friday, Oct. 2, 2015 

Time: 8:45-8:55 a.m. PST 

Location: Via phone 

RDS to call: 313-875-4480 


Purpose: To discuss priorities and key issues you are working on in 2015. 


Possible Topics: 

• Roads 

• DPS reform plans 

• Focus/priorities for remainder of the year 

• Flint Water 

• New Supreme Court Justice 

• BLM Ambassador Trip to California 

• Detroit homecoming 

• Amazon and Lear investments this week 

• China President visits/trade mission 

• Rising Tide initiative w/ TED 


Recent articles: 

Freep: Snyder appoints Joan Larsen to Supreme Court- 

M$&:/2wwwJansingstatejo^ 
iVA JP.C.^.0.1 .M. S.P.15.3 04 4 / 

AP: Michigan in early talks on taking more Syria, Middle East refugees, Snyder says- 

M£p.. : //wwwxrajnsdetroj^ 

.tM l5.t ORr.CO 

WILX: Governor Snyder Says Road Talks Going Well- 

AP: Snyder acknowledges some mistakes in tapping Flint River- 

.ti?. I?. PJ.EIS r. ItA! 0 ^ r. B I y.fr.r.'. .b ^ f.T? A 


Note: 

• Frank Beckmann will be broadcasting remotely from northern Michigan this day. Congressman John 
Moolenaar will be the guest immediately before the Governor. 

Last interview: 5/28/15 at Mackinac 

Market: Southeast Michigan- online at wjr.coro 

Contact: Studio: 313-875-4480; Back-up Producer Terri Leib cell^^Sgg&S&^^M 




From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Kennedy, Jordan (GOV) 

Tuesday, October 06, 2015 11:38 AM 
Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

RE: Flint Water updates 


We talked about it in our meeting today. We will be compiling and sending at the end of the day. ! believe Sara is point 
for this. 

Thanks, 

Jordan Kennedy 
Communications Representative 
Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 
Phone: 517.335.6397 



From: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2015 8:44 AM 

To: Kennedy, Jordan (GOV) < KennedvJ4@michigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: Flint Water updates 


Can you let me know if you hear that there will he stuff from comms for Flint Water updates every day? Want to he sure 
I'm not sending the briefing without comms input if they have input to provide. Thaaaanks © 


From: Emmitt, Beth (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2015 8:39 AM 

To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DickmsonS@michigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: Flint Water updates 


From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2015 8:30 AM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV) < scottal2@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Emmitt, Beth (GOV) < e:n m i ttb @ m jchigan.gov > ; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Re: Flint Water updates 

Yes. 

Sent from my iPhone 


On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:23 AM, Scott, Allison (GOV) <scottal2 @ michig a n..g o v> wrote: 


l 



See below - DAN can your team assist with daily updates to GOV for his nightly briefing so he 
is not up to date. Your team would be responsible for collecting info from other depts involved 
etc 

Let me know if you have questions or concerns 

Thanks 

Thanks 

Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < AgenJ@michigan. gov > 

Date: October 6, 2015 at 8:20:24 AM EDT 

To: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" <scotta 1 2 @m ich iga n. go v> 

Cc: "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" < e iemente@mi c h i gan go v >. "Muchmore, 

Dennis (GOV)" <muchmored @ fnich i ga n. go v> 

Subject: Re: Flint Water updates 

Update from Dan in briefing. Comms to also send update for briefing on stories or 
announcements upcoming. But Dan will have most accurate testing and analysis 
details to report. 


On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:14 AM, Scott, Allison (GOV) 

<scottal 2 @ michi ga n . go v> wrote : 


What is most effective accurate rout? Dan provided update for 
briefing each day or does Comms shop speak to DEQ Comms and 
provide? 


Sent from my iPhone 


On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:05 AM, Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

I wrote: 


We need a better update system re Flint Water. 


I saw in the press this am that DHHS announced 
yesterday that water filters would start being given 
out today. This should have come internally with 
more detail. I had press questions last night. 


2 



Overall, we should have a daily report on Flint until 
our recommendations are fully implemented. 


For example: 

1 . What are the water test results from the public 
schools? 

2. Flow many free test have been requested? How 
many have been done? How many remain and how 
long have they been waiting? What are the results - 
no lead, lead consistent with history, higher levels? 

3. How many filters have been distributed? How 
many unfulfilled requests? 

4. New blood test results? Especially in the two zip 
codes. 

5. Analysis of tech advisory group 

6. Analysis of the GLWA vs. Flint River vs. KWA. 


Thanks 

Rick 


Sent from my iPad 


3 



From: Scott, Allison (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 7:19 PM 

To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Snyder, Rick (GOV); Emmitt, Beth (GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT 

PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: City of Flint Water Funding Solution.pdf; ATT00001.htm; FLINT SCHOOL TESTING 

RESULTS. DOCX; ATT00002.htm; Drinking Water Regulations for Monitoring of Lead in 
Schools and Child C....doc; ATT00003.htm; Response to Corrosion Control 
Questions.docx; ATT00004.htm; Fwd: TAC Meeting Highlights; ATT00005.htm; CC 
Meeting Minutes 3-25-2013 (l).doc; ATT00006.htm; Flint.pdf; ATT00007.htm; KWA 
Contract (amended) 130165.2. pdf; ATT00008.htm 


We will put in pdf for you 
Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" < WvantP{® michigan.gov > 

Date: October 7, 2015 at 7:09:27 PM EDT 

To: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" < scottal2{®michigan.gov >. "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 
< muchmored@michigan.gov >. "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < Agenj(®michigan,gov >. "Dickinson, Sarah (GOV)" 
< DickinsonSgSrnichigan.gov >. "Emmitt, Beth (GOV)" < ernmittb@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Governor Snyder, 

I wanted to provide you with the attached documents to address a number of the 
questions that you are asking today. A full briefing for the press conference, including 
press release, talking points, run of show, and frequently asked questions, will be 
provided by your team. Included in this e-mail are the following attachments: 

1. Flint Drinking Water FY 2016 supplemental budget request summary 

2 . Summary of the Flint schools water testing results and our response to the 
results 

3. Drinking water regulations for monitoring lead in schools and child care centers 

4. Response to the questions on corrosion control 

5. Summary of today’s Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee meeting 

6. Flint City Council Minutes from March 25, 2013; the Resolution to Purchase 
Capacity from Karegnondi Water Authority; and the Amended Contract 

Other Updates 

Mayor Duggan and Sue McCormick of DWSD were contacted, briefed, and are 
supporting tomorrow’s announcement. Both have indicated they would provide positive 
comments supporting the decision. 


i 



Dan Wyant 



City of Flint Water - Funding Solution 
State of Michigan Commitment 


Agency 

i GF/GP : 

Gross ; 

j Comments 

l 

1 

I 

i i 

i l 

i I 

1 

1 

1 

l 

1 

1 

Filters: ; 

i i 

i i 

i i 

1 

1 

; 

i 

1 

Health & Human Services j 

j $1,016,000! 

$1,016,000! 

JAY15 work project 

1 

Health & Human Services j 

i so| 

1 1 

$ 1 , 000 , 000 ! 

!DEQ State Restricted Settlement Funds provided to HHS Emergency 
! 

jServices local office (FY16 appropriation). 

Subtotal Filters:! 

$1,016,000 1 

$2,016,000j 

1 

l 

i 

1 

1 1 
1 1 

1 

1 

l 

l 

i 

i 

; 

1 1 

1 1 

; i 

1 

1 

l 

1 

i 

Reconnect to DSW: ; 

1 

■ i 

■ i 

■ i 

■ i 

■ i 

i i 

■ 

1 

■ 

1 

1 

1 

i Reconnection costs ~$1.3m/month x 9 mos. to be shared by state & 
1 Flint 

Environmental Quality • 

: $5,000,000! 

$ 6 , 000 , 000 ! 

!DEQ State Restricted Settlement Fund of $lm; balance GF/GP 

Subtotal Reconnect:! 

$5,000,000| 

$6,000,000 1 

1 

1 

I 

1 1 
1 1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

Testing Costs: ' 

1 1 

1 

1 

Environmental Quality ; 

SI.OOO.OOOI 

$1,000,000! 

! Additional tests at state lab; cost per sample: $26 

Subtotal Testing:! 

$1,000,000! 

$ 1 , 000 , 000 ! 

1 

1 

1 

I 

1 1 
1 1 

i 

1 

1 

i 

1 

1 

Additional Agency Support: 

1 1 
1 1 
1 1 

1 

1 

■ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

LARA i 

1 

1 

1 

1 

! $0! 

1 1 

1 1 

j 1 

1 

1 

1 

$ 200 , 000 ! 

1 

1 

1 

■ Support for plumbing inspectors to do schools (public and parochial) and 
| health facilities (hospitals, Long Term Care, etc.). 

MSHDA 

$0! 

$249,900? 

1 

l 

Health & Human Services 

! $600,000! 

$600,000; 

(Follow-up on children with elevated blood levels 

Environmental Quality j 

$300.000j 

$300,000 j 

(Home and school inspections. 

Subtotal Additional Support:! 

$ 900 , 000 ! 

$1,349,900! 

1 

l 

i 

■ 

1 1 

1 1 

■ 

■ 

l 

1 

■ 

i 

1 1 

1 1 

■ 

1 

l 

l 

ALL TOTAL 

L L 

i $7,916,000! 

i I- 

$10,365,900: 

l 

l 

1 

J J 


5:52 PM 10/7/2015 


PRELIMINARY DRAFT 



FLINT SCHOOL TESTING RESULTS: 


WHAT DID WE FIND? 

1) The results of the initial screening conducted over the course of the last week are consistent with the 
last round of community lead and copper testing. 

2) There were a total of 37 samples taken from 13 schools. Of those 37 samples, 4 exceeded the 15 ppb 
action level. There were 3 schools that had samples exceeding the action level: Eisenhower Elementary 
(which had two samples exceeding 15 ppb). Brownell STEM Academy and Freeman Elementary each 
had one sample exceeding 15 PPB. The sample from Freeman Academy was significantly higher than 
the other samples at 101 PPB. 

3) Looking at the data from a health based perspective, the data clearly demonstrates that more 
detailed sampling needs to occur so that the various sources of lead contamination contained within 
each respective school's plumbing can be identified and addressed. 


WHAT DOES THE DATA MEAN? 

1) The data underscores the need for a complete and thorough evaluation of the plumbing system 
within each school. 

2) We have developed a protocol for evaluating the plumbing systems and we will be working with 
schools to implement these protocols and to assist them in determining a corrective action plan to 
address this issue. 

3) The State is identifying staff within DEQ, DHHS, LARA and Local County Health Departments to assist 
schools in conducting evaluations of their plumbing systems. 


WHAT IS YOUR PROTOCOL? 

1) DEQ's protocols are based on similar work done in Michigan and in other States. 

2) Multiple samples from each tap used for cooking or drinking water will be collected at prescribed 
intervals to identify levels of lead and its likely source. 

3) Once an evaluation is complete, we will be able to assist each School in developing a comprehensive 
plan to address issues on a site specific basis. 


HOW DO SCHOOLS RESPOND? 



1) Schools should continue protective measures that are currently in place until a complete study can be 
conducted at each school. This includes the continued use of bottled water for consumption purposes. 


2) We will be reaching out to schools to schedule a complete evaluation, assessment and sampling, of 
their plumbing systems. 



Drinking Water Regulations for Monitoring of Lead in Schools and Child Care Centers 


There is no federal or Michigan law requiring sampling of drinking water in schools that receive water from 
other public water systems, although schools that have their own water supply are subject to regulation and 
sampling as non-community public water systems. Schools served by a public water system may be included 
as a sampling site (i.e., tap) for a public water system’s lead and copper monitoring program if there are 
insufficient single-family homes that qualify. There are no federal requirements for more extensive testing. 

The 1986 Amendments to the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) required EPA to develop regulations to control 
for lead in drinking water. The Lead and Copper Rule (LCR), issued in 1991, is focused on controlling 
corrosion within the distribution system that delivers water to customers. The 1986 SDWA Amendments also 
required that only lead-free materials be used in new plumbing and in plumbing repairs. 

In 1988, the SDWA was further amended by the Lead Contamination Control Act (LCCA), to reduce the 
exposure of lead to children in schools and child care facilities. The LCCA prohibited the sale of any drinking 
water cooler that is not lead-free and required that: 

• the EPA identify each brand and model of drinking water cooler, indicating which are lead free and which 
have a lead-lined tank and distribute the list to states (SDWA Sec. 1463), 

• the Consumer Product Safety Commission order that manufacturers and importers of all drinking water 
coolers identified as having a lead-lined tank repair, replace, or recall and provide a refund for such coolers 
(SDWA Sec. 1462), 

• the EPA publish a guidance document and testing protocol to assist states in determining the source and 
degree of lead contamination in school drinking water (SDWA Sec. 1464), and 

• states establish programs to assist schools and child care facilities to test for and remedy lead contamination 
problems, with public availability of results of such testing (SDWA Sec. 1464(d)). 

As a result of a 1996 court decision, States are not required to establish testing programs. In its decision, the 
Fifth Circuit held that provisions in section 1464(d) were unconstitutional under the Tenth Amendment to the 
U.S. Constitution because they directly compelled the state to enact and enforce a federal regulatory program 
and provided no options for the State to decline the program. The decision did not, however, restrict states 
from developing and carrying out their own programs to assist schools. 

In 1989 and subsequent years, EPA released guidance and information to inform states and school systems 
how to test for and reduce the risk of lead exposure in school drinking water. EPA’s guidance provides a 
protocol for testing water in schools and recommends that schools take action at fixtures where the lead 
concentration exceeds 20 ppb. This concentration differs from the 15 ppb action level that public water 
systems are required to follow The 20 ppb action level is based on a smaller sample collection volume of 
250 milliliters (ml) and is designed to pinpoint specific fountains and outlets that require attention. 

In 1990, Michigan did provide schools and licensed child care centers with information to assist in testing and 
remedying potential lead contamination of their drinking water as required by the Lead Contamination Control 
Act of 1988. This information included a sampling protocol and guidance on flushing their system to minimize 
lead exposure. 

In 2004, EPA surveyed states to determine what additional programs may exist to control exposure to lead in 
drinking water at schools and child care centers. Forty-nine states, Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia and 
the Navajo Nation responded. Only 16 respondents indicated they have or will conduct special sampling or 
studies to target lead exposure at schools and child care centers. Michigan has not included any additional 
sampling programs or studies. Flowever, some local agencies have conducted voluntary programs. For 
example, the W.K, Kellogg Foundation funded a program implemented by the Calhoun County Health 
Department that sampled schools in Battle Creek. In Michigan’s response to this EPA survey, we included a 
recommendation for EPA to allow schools to be considered as a primary LCR monitoring site so that more 
information about lead levels in schools would become available. However, no changes in sampling criteria 
have occurred to date. 



In 2005, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the EPA, the Department of Education, the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the American Waterworks Association, the Association of 
Metropolitan Water Agencies, the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators, the National Association 
of Water Companies and the National Rural Water Association to facilitate actions that reduce children’s 
exposure to lead from drinking water at schools and child care facilities. 

Across the country and in Michigan, most schools and child care facilities receive water from other community 
water systems. However, those schools that have their own source of drinking water are considered non- 
transient non-community water systems and are subject to the LCR. In Michigan, there are 755 such schools 
and child care centers that must monitor for lead to demonstrate compliance. 



Response to Corrosion Control Questions 


- Lime Softening can affect the pH in water 

- The pH of the water is one physical characteristic that can affect the leaching of lead from pipes into 
the water 

- As per the requirements in the Lead/Copper rule the Flint Water system was evaluated for two 
consecutive monitoring periods and the results of the monitoring demonstrated that further action was 
necessary. 

- The DEQ promptly notified the Flint water system of the need for additional measures and the city of 
Flint promptly began putting together an action plan to address this need. 



From: 

Sent: 

Subject: 


Sygo, Jim (DEQ) 

Wednesday, October 07, 2015 6:00 PM 
Fwd: TAC Meeting Highlights 


Summary of advisory committee meeting 
Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Prysby, Mike (DEQ)" <PRY SB YM @m ich iga n, g o v> 

Date: October 7, 2015 at 4:56:44 PM EDT 
To: "Sygo, Jim (DEQ)" < S y go J @m i ch i ga n . go v> 

Subject: TAC Meeting Highlights 

Below is a summary of the Flint TAC meeting to obtain the committee's endorsement to switch 
back to Detroit water. 

1. The TAC endorses the switch back to the DWSD 

2. Marc Edwards of VA Tech supports the switchover to DWSD with conclusion that Flint River 
water with corrosion control will still be 4 times more corrosive 

than water from DWSD after 5 weeks of treatment. 

3. Genesee County states two weeks to prepare pipeline for re-use (flush, disinfect, sample, etc) 

4. Supplemental corrosion control still needed with DWSD water and ACT 399 submittal can be 
made in approx one week. 

5. No pros were brought to the table for staying on the Flint River. 

Sent from my iPhone 


l 



City of Flint, Michigan 

Third Floor, City Hall 
1101 S. Saginaw Street 
Flint, Michigan 48502 
www. cityofflint. com 



Meeting Minutes - Draft 

Monday, March 25, 2013 
5:33 PM 

Agenda amended to include Board of Hospital Managers appointments 

Council Chambers 

CITY COUNCIL 

Scott Kincaid, President, Ward 9 
Bryant W. Nolden, Vice President, Ward 3 

Claudia Croom, Ward 1 Jacqueline Poplar, Ward 2 

Joshua M. Freeman, Ward 4 Bernard Lawler, Ward 5 

Sheldon A. Neeley, Ward 6 Dale K. Weigh ill, Ward 7 

Michael J. Sarginson, Ward 8 


Inez M. Brown, City Clerk 




CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


CALL TO ORDER 

President Scott Kincaid called the meeting to order at 5:33 p.m. 

ROLL CALL 

Councilperson Michael Sarginson arrived at 5:37 p.m. 

Present: Councilperson: Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson 

Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
Kincaid, Councilperson Weighill and Councilperson Croom 

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE 

Councilperson Sheldon Neeley led the Pledge of Allegiance. 

SPECIAL ORDER 

130217 Special Order/Information & Discussion/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) 

A Special Order as requested by Council President Scott Kincaid to continue 
discussion and review of information on the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA). 


Presented 

PETITIONS AND UNOFFICIAL COMMUNICATIONS 

130193 Change to Digital/All Limited Basic Service Channels/Comcast Cablevision 

Communication dated March 6, 2013, from Gerald W. Smith, Government Affairs 
Manager, Comcast, to Flint City Clerk, re: On or shortly after April 9, 2013, Comcast 
will convert all Limited Basic service channels -- including Public, Government and 
Educational Access (PEG) channels to digital format, and will provide customers 
with digital equipment. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

130199 Certified Letter/Loyst Fletcher, Jr. & Associates 

Communication received from Loyst Fletcher, Jr. to Chief Legal Officer, re: He 
questions the tax-exempt status of Word of Life Christian Church, which received a 
tax bill from the city. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

130200 Local Approval Notice/Michigan Liquor Control Commission (MLCC)/Time 

Square/Ward 3 

Local Approval Notice dated March 14, 2013, from MLCC to Flint City Clerk, re: The 
MLCC has received a request to transfer all stock in 2012 Class C license with 
Sunday Sales Permit (PM) and Dance Permit, located at 4522 N. Saginaw, 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 1 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


Flint, Michigan, 48505, Genesee County, held by the estate of Myra Seals, Inc., 
1028 Cora Dr., Flint, Ml 48532, to Carisa Mays Bishop, Personal Representative. 
[NOTE: Approval order enclosed.] 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130202 Local Approval Notice/Michigan Liquor Control Commission (MLCC)/D & R Market, 

Inc./Ward 6 

Local Approval Notice dated March 6, 2013, and received March 15, 2013, from 
MLCC to Flint City Clerk, re: The MLCC has received an application from 2 AAR, 
LLC, requesting to Transfer Ownership of a Specially Designated Distributor (SDD) 
and Specially Designated Merchant (SDM) licensed business with Sunday Sales 
permit (PM) and Direct Connection-1 to D & R Market, Inc., located at 1402-1404 N. 
Chevrolet, Flint, Michigan, 48504, Genesee County, from 2 AAR, LLC, 3079 
Shattuck Arms Blvd., Apt. 5, Saginaw, Ml 48603. [NOTE: The application was 
cancelled pursuant to a request from an attorney.] 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130204 Changes/Cable Channel Lineup/Comcast Cablevision 

Communication dated March 18, 2013, from Gerald W. Smith, Government Affairs 
Manager, Comcast, to Flint City Clerk, re: effective on or about May 22, 2013, Fox 
Business Network/Fox Business Network HD (ch. 06/243) will from the Digital 
Preferred Service to the Digital Starter Service. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130205 Media Alert/Flint Public Art Project/Announcement of Design Winner 

Media Alert received via e-mail on March 19, 2013, from the American Institute of 
Architects (AIA), re: The Flint Public Art Project and the Flint Chapter of the AIA will 
announce the winner of the $25,000.00 grand prize in the inaugural Flat Lot 
competition to design and build a temporary summer pavilion on Flint's central 
downtown parking lot at 9:30 a.m. Thursday, March 21, 2013, at the John Gazall & 
Associates, Mott Building, 503 S. Saginaw Street, Flint. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130207 Damage Claims 

MAYFIELD, LINDA, 2518 Walter Street, Flint, Ml (WARD 2) 

LANE, WILLIE C., 3130 Concord Street, Flint, Ml (WARD 6) 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

COMMUNICATIONS FROM CITY OFFICIALS 

130194 Press Release/City of Flint/Hiring of New Police Officers/Recruitment of Others 

Press Release dated March 11, 2013, from Jason Lorenz, City of Flint Public 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 2 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130195 


130196 


130201 


130203 


Information Officer, re: The City of Flint has seven new police officers on the job 
from the public safety millage passed last November by voters. The city's next step 
is to hold a recruitment drive by working with a local college, which will set up a 
Police Academy when the city has gathered sufficient interest from its efforts. 


This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


Press Release/City of Flint/Sunday Sales of Alcohol Before Noon Not Permitted on 
St. Patrick's Day 

Press Release dated March 12, 2013, from Jason Lorenz, City of Flint Public 
Information Officer, re: The City of Flint will not be able to permit Sunday alcohol 
sales before noon this Sunday, March 17, St. Patrick's Day. While the city adopted 
a resolution to allow a one-time exception to the Sunday morning alcohol ban, the 
Michigan Liquor Control Commission has taken the position that the city cannot 
create a one-day exemption. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


Flint City Council/Public Notice/Special City Council Meeting/March 18, 2013 

Public Notice posted March 14, 2013, re: The Flint City Council will hold a Special 
City Council Meeting, followed by a Finance Committee Meeting, at 5:30 p.m. 
Monday, March 18, 2013, in the City Council Chambers, 3rd Floor, City Hall, to 
consider a contract with the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA). 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

Emergency Financial Manager (EFM) Order #1 0/Grant Applications 

Order #10 issued by Emergency Financial Manager on March 15, 2013, "Grant 
Applications," re: "all city officials, department heads, division heads and employees 
shall adhere to ...requirements regarding the approval of any and all grant 
applications on behalf of the City of Flint or grant applications submitted by others 
which in any way involves the financial, programmatic or personnel support by the 
City of Flint." The five requirements, including the stipulation that only the 
Emergency Financial Manager or City Administrator are authorized to accept grants 
on behalf of the city, are included in the order. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


Press Release/City of Flint/Flint Lifelines/Meeting Announcement 

Press Release dated March 16, 2013, from Jason Lorenz, City of Flint Public 
Information Officer, re: Flint Lifelines, formerly CeaseFire Flint, will hold community 
meetings on the fourth Thursday of each month, beginning at 1 p.m. Thursday, 
March 28, 2013 at Flint Northwestern High School. The meetings are open to the 
public. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 3 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130206 Flint City Council/Public Notice/Finance Committee Meeting/March 20, 201 3 

Public Notice posted March 19, 2013, re: The Flint City Council will hold a Finance 
Committee Meeting at 5:30 p.m. Wednesday, March 20, 2013, in the City Council 
Committee Room, 3rd Floor, City Hall. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130208 Flint City Council/Public Notice/Special Affairs Committee Meeting/March 25, 2013 

Public Notice posted March 22, 2013, re: The Flint City Council will hold a Special 
Affairs Committee Meeting at 5 p.m. Monday, March 25, 2013, in the City Council 
Committee Room, 3rd Floor, City Hall. A regular City Council meeting will 
immediately follow in the Council Chambers. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130209 Traffic Engineering/Note for Bulletin/Street-Sidewalk-Lane Closures 

Notes for Bulletin (3) dated February/March 2013, for street, sidewalk, or lane 
closures, re: (1) Harrison Street, Saginaw Street and Second Avenue (cable 
failure-March 11-March 20); (2) First Street, Harrison Street, Wallenberg, Kearsley, 
Crapo, Horrigan, and Harrison (St. Patrick's Day Pot O' Gold 4-Mil Run/Walk-March 
17); and (3) Chevrolet Avenue (University Corner Grand Opening-March 22). 


This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

Passed The Consent Agenda 

A motion was made. The motion carried. 

PUBLIC SPEAKERS 
ROLL CALL 

Councilperson Dale Weighill left at approximately 1 p.m. 

Present: Councilperson: Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson 

Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: Councilperson: Councilperson Weighill 


APPOINTMENTS 

130169.1 Amendment/Reappointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/Christine Monk (Ward 6) 

Amended resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the 
reappointment of Christine Monk (821 Frank Street, Flint Ml 48504 - Ward 6), to 
the Zoning Board of Appeals for a three-year term, commencing September 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 4 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130211 


130212 


130213 


1 , 201 1 , and expiring September 1 , 2014. [By way of background, Ms. Monk's term 
on the Zoning Board of Appeals expired in September 201 1 , but she has continued 
since that time to serve.] [Resolution amended to fix typographical error in first 
paragraph of resolution from "Board of Review" to "Zoning Board of Appeals."] 


Sponsors: Sheldon A. Neeley 

A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Appointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/Chris Zuwala (Ward 4) 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the appointment of 
Chris Zuwala (3510 Whittier Avenue, Flint Ml 48506 - Ward 4) to the Zoning Board 
of Appeals for a three-year term, expiring September 1, 2013. [NOTE: By way of 
background, Gloria Kelly's term as the 4th Ward representative expired in 
September 2007, but she continued to serve until resigning in January 2013.] 


Sponsors: Joshua M. Freeman 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Councilperson Poplar, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Reappointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/Birdie V. Brooks (Ward 5) 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the reappointment of 
Birdie V. Brooks (1307 Columbia Lane, Flint Ml 48503 - Ward 5), to the Zoning 
Board of Appeals for the remainder of a three-year term, expiring September 1 , 
2014. [Byway of background, Ms. Brook's term on the Zoning Board of Appeals 
expired in September 201 1 , but she has continued since that time to serve.] 


Sponsors: Bernard Lawler 

A motion was made by Councilperson Lawler, seconded by Councilperson Neeley, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 5 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130214 


130215 


Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the reappointment of 
Marcia Braden (984 Barney Avenue, Flint Ml 48503 - Ward 8), to the Zoning 
Board of Appeals for the remainder of a three-year term, expiring September 1 , 
2014. [By way of background, Ms. Braden's term on the Zoning Board of Appeals 
expired in September 201 1 , but she has continued since that time to serve.] 


Sponsors: Michael J. Sarginson 

A motion was made by Councilperson Sarginson, seconded by Councilperson 
Freeman, that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Reappointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/David C. Veasley (Ward 9) 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the reappointment of 
David C. Veasley (261 8 Pinetree Drive, Flint Ml 48507 - Ward 9), to the Zoning 
Board of Appeals for the remainder of a three-year term, expiring September 1 , 
2015. [Byway of background, Mr. Veasley's term on the Zoning Board of Appeals 
expired in September 2009, but he has continued since that time to serve ] 


Sponsors: Scott Kincaid 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Appointment/Genesee County Land Bank Citizens' Advisory Council/Anthony 
Tucker (Ward 4) 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the appointment of 
Anthony Tucker (2960 Henry Street, Flint Ml 48506 - Ward 4) to the Genesee 
County Land Bank Citizens' Advisory Council for the remainder of a three-year 
term, expiring in January 2016. [NOTE: By way of background, Dan Anderson's 
term as the 4th Ward representative expired in January 2013.] 

Sponsors: Joshua M. Freeman 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Councilperson Poplar, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 6 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130218 


130219 


130220 


Reappointment/Hurley Board of Hospital Managers/Philip W. Shaltz 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council approves the reappointment of Philip 
W. Shaltz (14144 Moffet Drive, Fenton, Ml 48430) to an additional five-year term on 
the (Hurley) Board of Hospital Managers, with such term to commence May 1, 

2013, and expire April 30, 2018. 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Appointment/Hurley Board of Hospital Managers/Delrico Loyd 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council approves the appointment of Delrico 
Loyd (2641 Westwood Parkway, Flint, Ml 48507) to a five-year term on the (Hurley) 
Board of Hospital Managers, with such term to commence May 1, 2013, and expire 
April 30, 2018. [By way of background, Carl E. Mason was appointed in June 2008; 
his term expires April 30, 2013.] 

Approved 

Substituted 

A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Lawler, 
that this matter be POSTPONED for March 27, 2013. The motion failed by the 
following vote: 

Aye: 3 - Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley and Councilperson Sarginson 

No: 5 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Substituted 

A motion was made by Vice President Nolden, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 5 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

No: 3 - Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley and Councilperson Sarginson 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Appointment/Hurley Board of Hospital Managers/Donna Poplar 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council approves the appointment of Donna 
Poplar (5277 Kimberly Woods Circle, Flint, Ml 48504) to a five-year term 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 7 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


on the (Hurley) Board of Hospital Managers, with such term to commence May 1, 
2013, and expire April 30, 2018. [Byway of background, Frances Gilcreastwas 
appointed in August 2008; her term expires April 30, 2013.] 

Approved 

Substituted 

A motion was made by Councilperson Lawler, seconded by Councilperson Neeley, 
that this matter be POSTPONED for March 26, 2013. The motion carried by the 
following vote: 

Aye: 7 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Lawler, 

Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and 
Councilperson Croom 

No: 1 - Councilperson Freeman 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

RESOLUTIONS 

130165.1 Amended Resolution/Contract/City of Flint/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) 

Amended resolution resolving that city officials are authorized to enter into a 
contract with Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) to purchase fifteen (15) units of 
capacity, AND, resolving that the City Administrator is authorized to provide KWA 
information needed to administer the contract, and, with approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. [NOTE: For 
each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer shall pay to the KWA a 
one-time fee of $32,300. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the KWA not less than 
$32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated 
amount NOT-TO-EXCEED $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the 
bonds are paid in full. If it is determined that the costs per unit will exceed 
$355,300.00, the buyer has a right to cancel the contract. Over the next 25 years, it 
is expected that continuing with Detroit will cost the region $2.1 billion, compared to 
$1.9 billion with a pipeline.] [NOTE: Contract not included.] [NOTE: Resolution 
amended from 18 to 15 units of capacity.] 


A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, 
that this matter be Amended. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 5 - Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, 

Councilperson Neeley and Councilperson Sarginson 

No: 3 - Councilperson Poplar, President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

130165.2 Amended Resolution/Contract/City of Flint/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) 

Amended resolution resolving that city officials are authorized to enter into a 
contract with Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) to purchase sixteen (16) units 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 8 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130216 


130216.1 


of capacity, AND, resolving that the City Administrator is authorized to provide KWA 
information needed to administer the contract, and, with approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. [NOTE: For 
each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer shall pay to the KWA a 
one-time fee of $32,300. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the KWA not less than 
$32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated 
amount NOT-TO-EXCEED $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the 
bonds are paid in full. If it is determined that the costs per unit will exceed 
$355,300.00, the buyer has a right to cancel the contract. Over the next 25 years, it 
is expected that continuing with Detroit will cost the region $2.1 billion, compared to 
$1.9 billion with a pipeline.] [NOTE: Contract not included.] [NOTE: Resolution 
amended from 15 to 16 units of capacity.] 


A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, 
that this matter be Adopted. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 7 - Councilperson Poplar, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, 

Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and 
Councilperson Croom 

No: 1 - Vice President Nolden 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Approval/The First Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the Downtown 
Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint 

Resolution that the City of Flint hereby approves and The First Amendment & 
Restated Rules Governing the Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the 
City of Flint, attached hereto. [NOTE: The City of Flint created the DDA, in 
accordance with Public Act 1 97 of 1 975, as amended, and approved The Rules 
Governing the DDA in 1977. Public Act 197 has been amended and revised at 
various times since then, which required the proposed changes.] [NOTE: The First 
Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the Downtown Development Authority 
(DDA) of the City of Flint is attached.] 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, 
that this matter be Amended. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Amended Resolution/Approval/The First Amendment & Restated Rules Governing 
the Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint 

Amended resolution that the City of Flint hereby approves and The First 
Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the Downtown Development Authority 
(DDA) of the City of Flint, attached hereto. [NOTE: The City of Flint created the 
DDA, in accordance with Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended, and approved The 
Rules Governing the DDA in 1977. Public Act 197 has been 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 9 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


amended and revised at various times since then, which required the proposed 
changes.] [NOTE: The First Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the 
Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint is attached.] 

[Resolution amended for changes to rules.] 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, 
that this matter be Adopted. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

RESOLUTIONS - MAY BE REFERRED FROM S.A. 

130210 Resolution/City Council/Mayor Dayne Walling/Request for Appointment of 

Transition Advisory Board 

Resolution resolving that Mayor Dayne Walling and the Flint City Council request 
and recommend to Gov. Rick Snyder that a receivership transition advisory board 
be appointed for the City of Flint under Public Act 436 no later than July 1 , 201 3. 
[NOTE: On December 1, 2011, Gov. Snyder appointed Michael K. Brown as 
Emergency Manager under Public Act 4 for the City of Flint, due in part to a 
consistent deficit in the general fund, the decline in pooled cash, budget issues and 
unfunded liabilities for post-employment benefits. Due to the suspension and 
subsequent repeal of Public Act 4, Gov. Snyder appointed Edward J. Kurtz as 
Emergency Financial Manager under Public Act 72 for the City of Flint, effective 
August 9, 2012. Both the Emergency Manager and the subsequently appointed 
Emergency Financial Manager were authorized by virtue of their appointment to 
“act for and in the place and stead of the governing body and the office of chief 
administrative officer of the City of Flint.” On March 28, 2013, Public Act 436 will 
become effective and provides that an emergency financial manager appointed and 
serving under state law immediately prior to the effective date shall continue to 
serve as an emergency manager under Public Act 436. As an alternative to 
continuation of an emergency manager, and if the financial emergency has been 
rectified, Public Act 436 authorizes the governor to appoint a receivership transition 
advisory board, which serves at the pleasure of the governor and monitors the 
affairs of the local government until the receivership is terminated.] 


No vote was taken on this amendment. 

Amended 


130210.1 Amended Resolution/City Council/Mayor Dayne Walling/Request for Appointment 
of Transition Advisory Board 

Amended resolution resolving that Mayor Dayne Walling and the Flint City Council 
request and recommend to Gov. Rick Snyder that a receivership transition advisory 
board be appointed for the City of Flint under Public Act 436 no later than July 1 , 
2013. [NOTE: On December 1 , 201 1 , Gov. Snyder appointed Michael K. Brown as 
Emergency Manager under Public Act 4 for the 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 10 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


City of Flint, due in part to a consistent deficit in the general fund, the decline in 
pooled cash, budget issues and unfunded liabilities for post-employment benefits. 
Due to the suspension and subsequent repeal of Public Act 4, Gov. Snyder 
appointed Edward J. Kurtz as Emergency Financial Manager under Public Act 72 
for the City of Flint, effective August 9, 201 2. Both the Emergency Manager and 
the subsequently appointed Emergency Financial Manager were authorized by 
virtue of their appointment to “act for and in the place and stead of the governing 
body and the office of chief administrative officer of the City of Flint.” On March 28, 
2013, Public Act 436 will become effective and provides that an emergency 
financial manager appointed and serving under state law immediately prior to the 
effective date shall continue to serve as an emergency manager under Public Act 
436. As an alternative to continuation of an emergency manager, and if the financial 
emergency has been rectified, Public Act 436 authorizes the governor to appoint a 
receivership transition advisory board, which serves at the pleasure of the governor 
and monitors the affairs of the local government until the receivership is 
terminated.] [Six-page resolution amended for changes proposed by City Council, 
City Clerk and Mayor Dayne Walling.] 


A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Councilperson Poplar, 
that this matter be Adopted. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

MEETING SCHEDULE 
ADDITIONAL COUNCIL DISCUSSION 
ADJOURNMENT 

Having no further business, Council President Scott Kincaid adjourned the meeting at 8:59 
p.m. 

Respectfully transcribed and submitted, 

Janell Johnson. Administrative Secretary to Citv Council 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 11 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





BY THE EMERGENCY MANAGER: 


EM SUBMISSION NO. : SLQt3£MQ <// 
PRESENTED ! 3 1 3 

ADOPTED: 




RESOLUTION TO PURCHASE CAPACITY FROM 
KAREGNONDI WATER AUTHORITY 


The Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) is a governmental consortium of cities and 
counties in southeastern Michigan that was created to build a water pipeline that will provide 
water from Lake Huron to interested communities in Sanilac, Lapeer, and Genesee counties. 
The incorporating bodies that created the KWA are Sanilac County, Lapeer County, Genesee 
County, the City of Flint, and the City of Lapeer. 

The City of Flint is currently in a year to year contract with the City of Detroit for the 
purchase of water. A study was conducted that projected that staying with Detroit will cost the 
region $2.1 billion over the next 25 years. In contrast, if the region builds its own pipeline, the 
projected costs are $1.9 billion over the same period. After the initial 25 year period, the 
projected costs would be less then 25% of the projected water costs from Detroit. 

In order to build the pipeline, the KWA needs commitment from its members regarding 
the capacity that each member will purchase in the pipeline. The KWA is allowed to withdraw 
85 million gallons of water per day. Capacity is available to members in increments of 1 million 
gallons per day known as units. For each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer 
shall pay to the KWA a one time fee of $32,300.00. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the 
KWA not less then $32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated amount not 
to exceed $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the bonds are paid in full. If it is 
determined that the costs per unit will exceed $355,300.00 the buyer has a right to cancel the 
contract. 

The purchase of capacity along with the payment of other costs necessary to operate the 
pipeline gives the member a right to water for sale to its customers. The buyer has a right to 
resell capacity and water rights. Each party entering into a capacity contract shall also be 
entitled to appoint additional board members equal to the party’s percentage share of the total 
capacity under contract. 

It is in the long term best interests of the City of Flint to enter into a contract with the 
KWA to purchase up to eighteen (1 8) units of capacity. 



IT IS RESOLVED that City officials are authorized to enter into a contract with KWA 
to purchase up to eighteen ( 18 ) units of capacity. 

IT IS FURTHER RESOLVED that the City Administrator is authorized to provide 
KWA information needed to administer the contract and, vvitli approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. 



ENACT \/ FAIL 



Edward L. Kurtz, Enter 


APPROVED AS TO FINANCE: 



^^-Gerald Ambrose, Finance Director 


dated 


SAP. Bnde\E|Vf20 ! 3\Resolutio»s\KWA.03.28. 1 3.doc 


Flint City Council approves resolution to buy water from Karegnondi, state approval still ... Page 1 of 2 


Flint 


Flint City Council approves resolution to buy water 
from Karegnondi, state approval still needed 


J ) [httpiffconnacl.mllve.comistaff/dadamsl/lndex.html] By Dominic Adams | dadams5@mllvo.com thltp://conncct.mllv».com/staffWadams1/posts.htmlJ 
/ Follow on Twitter [http:tfwww.twltter.com/doniln1cadams] 

%i ' on March 25. 2013 at 10:45 PM, updated March 26, 2013 at 1:23 AM 

FLINT, MI - Flint is one step closer to getting its water from Lake Huron as part of the Karegnondi Water Authority. 

The vote, approved 7-1 at tire Flint City Council meeting Monday, March 25 

[http://w%vTv.mlive,com/ne\vs/flint/index,ssf/20i3/o3/flint_citj r _council_again_delay.litml] , may have set in motion the 
end to Flint paying to get its water from Detroit. 

Under the proposal, Flint would get 16 million gallons per day of raw water from Lake Huron, pipe it to Flint for treatment and then sell it 
to customers throughout the city. Another 2 million gallons per day would come from the Flint River and wilt be treated in Flint, 

Mayor Dayne Walling said the Department of Environmental Quality must approve Flint’s getting 2 million gallons per day from the Flint 
River. 

Tuesday’s meeting followed weeks of discussions and special meetings surrounding the resolution. 

“We got there,” Councilman Joshua Freeman said. “That’s the important thing.” 

There were more than 50 people at Monday’s meeting. 

“Going with Karegnondi is the best decision. We have no opinion on the economics of the decision,” said Rebecca Fedewa, Flint River 
Watershed Coalition executive director. “If we start drawing water out of the Fiint River, we are at risk of having to start releasing w'ater 
from our reservoirs.” 

Genesee County Drain Commissioner Jeff Wright said the decision must still be approved by a count}' water and waste advisory board. The 
KWA board will then be reconvened for final approval. 

Wright said construction could start in May. 

State treasuiy officials still must approve the city council's move because Flint has an emergency financial manager. All expenditures over 
$50,000 must be approved. 

Genesee County Drain Commissioner Jeff Wright has said that Flint would pay roughly $6.4 million annually for water service if it joined 
the pipeline - a nearly $4 million savings on what it pays Detroit for water. 

Walling previously said the city would save $19 million over eight years 

[http://www.nilive.coin/news/fllnt/index, ssf/20i3/o3/flint_city_council_delays_deci.html] by getting water from the 
KWA. 

"It’s a historic night in the City of Flint,” Walling said. “The savings will be less with the capacity level approved by city council because 
there will be increased treatment cost for the river water.” 

He said the DEQ told the city it needed to get 18 million gallons per day or there would have to be additional work done at Flint’s water 
plant. 

Flint’s water plant and the Flint River is currently the backup for Flint and Genesee County, however, the plant only operates four times 
per year. 

Councilman Bryant Nolden was the lone dissenting vote. 


http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2013/03/flint_city_council_approves_re.html 


10/7/2015 



Flint City Council approves resolution to buy water from Karegnondi, state approval still ... Page 2 of 2 


“It was a protest vote,” Nolden said. “I knew they had enough votes. I just feel like the Flint River is our best option.” 

Karengnondi is the regional water authority that includes Genesee, Lapeer and Sanilac counties and the cities of Flint and Lapeer. 

Flint is the second municipality, behind Genesee County, to officially decide to purchase raw water through the KWA. Lapeer city officials 
said they intend to purchase water, but an agreement has been finalized. 

Dominic Adams is a reporter for MLive-FIint Journal. Contact him at dadams5@mlive.c0m or 810-241-8803. Follow him on 
Twitter [http://ioww.twitter.com/domimcadamsj , Facebook [httji://ivwiv Jacebook.com/dominic.adams.1865] or 
Google+ [https;/ /plus. google.com/1036906725068087299119rel-author] . 

IS 


Related Stories 


Price of Detroit water for Flint is $1 .5 
million a month, mayor says 


lhUp://www.mlive.corn/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/10/mayor_city_ad 




Here’s how that toxic lead gets into Flint 
water 


(http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/10/see_step_by_; 


Registration on or use of this silo constitutes acceptance of our User Ag reement and Privacy Policy 
© 2015 Mltve Media Group All rights reserved (About Us). 

The materia! on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Mltve 
Media Group 

Community Rules appty to all content you upload or othervrise submit to this site. Contact interactivity management. 

Ad Choices 


http://v\ r ww.mlive.coni/news/flint/index,ssf/2013/03/flint_city_council_approves_re,htnil 


10/7/2015 




$ ~GOUNTY | 

GENESEE COUNTY DRAIN COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE 

GENESEE COUNTY 

I fcjfcjlreia | 

JEFFREY WRIGHT 

mmm 

iDRAfN COMMJ6 SJONBr| 

COMMISSIONER 

OFtAfN COMMISSfONER 


G-4608 BEECHER ROAD, FLINT, Ml 48532 
PHONE (810) 732-1590 FAX (810) 732-1474 


FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE CONTACT: Jeff Wright 

March 26, 2013 810-287-1925 


What: Jeff Wright Statement on Flint City Council Approving Resolution to Join KWA. 
When: March 26, 2013 


Additional Info: Jeff Wright, CEO of the KWA, today praised the Flint City Council for voting to approve 
a resolution to officially have the City of Flint join the KWA and its' water line, 

"I have said from the beginning that this decision must be made by Flint's City Council and Mayor," said 
Wright. "I appreciate the council voting the way they did, but even more than that, I am glad the 
residents of Flint were able to have their voices heard via their elected officials." The next step in the 
process will come with the KWA Board executing the contract for the City. 

"The most important aspect from the vote is the fact that we as an Authority can move forward 
knowing Flint's intentions," said Wright. 

Despite Emergency Manager Ed Kurtz publicly supporting the project, Wright had made a vote by 
council a condition of Flint joining the KWA so the residents would have their say. 

"There is a basic tenet that government is best when it has local control. We saw that with the council 
vote. Nobody, whether they live in Flint, Grand Blanc, Davison, Fenton, or anywhere in Genesee County, 
should have these types of decisions made by people who live outside of their community," said Wright. 

At the next Water and Waste Advisory Board meeting a vote will be taken to award a contract for 
construction of the intake portion of the water line. All bids were submitted to the board at their last 
meeting for review. 




RtCK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 


State of Michigan 
DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY 
Lansing 


ANDY DILLON 
STATE TREASURER 


Mr. Edward Kurtz April 11,2013 

Emergency Manager 
City of Flint 

1 101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 

Dear Mr. Kurtz: 

Thank you for your March 29, 2013 letter, which is attached for reference. As the Emergency 
Manager for the City of Flint (“Flint” or “City”), you have asked for my concurrence, pursuant to 
Public Act 436 of 2012, the Local Financial Stability and Choice Act, to authorize a contract in 
excess of $50,000.00 not subject to competitive bidding. This request was related to the City 
entering into an agreement with the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) for provision of raw 
water for the City. 

In considering your request, I took note of the following facts in support of Flint joining KWA. 
First, there is widespread support in the City for this move, including the support of the Mayor, 
the City Council, and the Emergency Manager. Second, this move will provide a unique 
opportunity for the City and County to partner on an important project, which will hopefully lead 
to future regional collaboration. Third, the Department of Environmental Quality is supportive of 
the City participating in the KWA project. Finally, your representations that this deal will lead to 
substantial savings for the City over the coming decades, savings that are desperately needed to 
help with the turnaround of the City of Flint. 

It is my understanding that the Detroit Water and Sewer Department is making a final best offer 
to Genesee County and the City of Flint next Monday, April 1 5, 2013. As such, this approval 
will be effective at 5 pm on April 16, 2013 after receiving written notice from the City that either 
no such offer was presented to the county and the City or that an offer was received and was 
rejected in good faith based upon specified objections. 

For the reasons described above and subject to the conditions set forth herein, pursuant to 
Section 12 (3) of PA 436 of 2012, 1 am authorizing you to proceed with adopting the resolution 
and entering into a contract with KWA. 



P.O, SOX 30716 * LANSING, MICHIGAN 48909 
www.michlgan.gov/treasury> (517) 373-3200 



Flint council supports buying water from Lake Huron through KWA | MLive.com 


Page 1 of 1 


Flint 


Flint council supports buying water from Lake Huron 
through KWA 


gl [http://connect.mllYe.com/staffldadams1/lnd8X.htnil] By Dominic Adams | dadams5@mllvs.com [hltp://connect.mllve.com/staff/dadams1/posts.h(ml] 
•¥> Follow on Twitter [http://www.twltter.com/domlnlcadams] 
lv ‘ on Mart* 25, 2013 at 7:17 PM, updated March 26, 2013 at 7:43 AM 

FLINT, MI — Flint residents may soon get their water from Lake Huron. 


The Flint City Council voted 7-1 to get 16 million gallons per day from the Karegnondi Water Authority. 


"This is about compromise," said Councilman Sheldon Neeley. 


Neeley got support from Councilman Joshua Freeman, after the two were previously at odds about the amount the city should withdraw 
from Lake Huron. 

Councilman Bryant Nolden was the lone "no" vote. 


"It was a protest vote," Nolden said. "I just feel like the Flint River is our best option." 

Genesee County Drain Commissioner said construction of the pipeline could start in May. 

The city currently pays to get its water from Detroit. 

State treasury officials still must approve the city council's move because Flint has an emergency financial manager. All expenditures over 
$50,000 must be approved. 

Dominic Adams is a reporter for MLive-Flint Journal Contact him at dadams5@mlive.c07n or 810-341-8803. Follow him on 
Tiuitter [http://ioiow.tioitter.com/dominicadams] , Facebook [http://wwwJdcebook.com/dominic.adams.1865] or 
Google+ [https://plus.googie.com/10369067250680872991rtrefcauthov ] . 


Related Stories 



Enbridge can begin piping tar sands oil 
along Lake Ontario north shore 



Former Detroit American Motors Corp. 
headquarters being auctioned; starting bid 
$500 


[http://wvw.mlive.com/news/index.ssf/201 5/1 0/enbridge_can_beg 


[http://www,mlive,com/news/detroit/index.ssf/201 5/1 0/former_detn 


Registration on or use oF this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement and Privacy Policy 
©2015 MLtve Media Group A5! rights reserved (About Us), 

The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the priorwritten permission of MLive 
Media Group 

Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site. Contact Interactivity management. 

[> Ad Choices 


http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2013/03/flint_city_council_again_delay.htnil 


10/7/2015 




Resolution: 


130165.2 

Presented: 3 - 11-13 

Adopted: 3 - 25-13 


AMENDED RESOLUTION TO PURCHASE CAPACITY 
FROM KAREGNONDI WATER AUTHORITY 


BY THE MAYOR: 

The Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) is a governmental consortium of cities and 
counties in southeastern Michigan that was created to build a water pipeline that will provide 
water from Lake Huron to interested communities in Sanilac, Lapeer, and Genesee counties. 
The incorporating bodies that created the KWA are Sanilac County, Lapeer County, Genesee 
County, the City of Flint, and the City of Lapeer. 

The City of Flint is currently in a year to year contract with the City of Detroit for the 
purchase of water. A study was conducted that projected that staying with Detroit will cost the 
region $2.1 billion over the next 25 years. In contrast, if the region builds its own pipeline, the 
projected costs are $1.9 billion over the same period. After the initial 25 year period, the 
projected costs would be less then 25% of the projected water costs from Detroit. 

In order to build the pipeline, the KWA needs commitment from its members regarding 
the capacity that each member will purchase in the pipeline. The KWA is allowed to withdraw 
85 million gallons of water per day. Capacity is available to members in increments of 1 million 
gallons per day known as units. For each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer 
shall pay to the KWA a one time fee of $32,300.00. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the 
KWA not less then $32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated amount not 
to exceed $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the bonds are paid in full. If it is 
determined that the costs per unit will exceed $355,300.00 the buyer has a right to cancel the 
contract. 

The purchase of capacity along with the payment of other costs necessary to operate the 
pipeline gives the member a right to water for sale to its customers. The buyer has a right to 
resell capacity and water rights. Each party entering into a capacity contract shall also be 
entitled to appoint additional board members equal to the party’s percentage share of the total 
capacity under contract. 

The City of Flint has decided that it is in its long term best interests to enter into a 
contract with the KWA to purchase SIXTEEN (16) units of capacity, plus TWO (2) units from 
the Flint River. 



IT IS RESOLVED that City officials are authorized to enter into a contract with KWA 
to purchase SIXTEEN (16) units of capacity, plus TWO (2) units from the Flint River. 

IT IS FURTHER RESOLVED that the City Administrator is authorized to provide 
KWA information needed to administer the contract and, with approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. 


APPROVED AS TO FORM: 



APPROVED AS TO FINANCE: 


Gerald Ambrose 
Finance Director 


APPROVED BY MAYOR: 


Dayne Walling 
Mayor 


APPROVED BY CITY COUNCIL 
ON: March 25. 2013 

Inez Brown /J 
Clerk, City of Flint 


APPROVED BY 
CITY COUNCIL 

MAR 25 2013 

■•A :L>v 


S:\JP\Ordinances and Resos\KWA.03.08.13.doc 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Tuesday, October 13, 2015 2:34 PM 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 
(GOV); Sedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

2015-10-13 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 
CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

2015-10-13 Action Steps Week of October 12-16.pdf; 2015-10-13 Flint Drinking 
Water Action Plan Update.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 12-16 


Step No. 

Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Identify schools and prioritize for 
assessment 

GCISD, GCHD, DEQ, 
DHHS, and Flint 

Steve Busch 

Done 10/13/15 

2. 

Get DLARA plumbers organized 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 


3. 

Complete sampling instructions 

DEQ, DHHS, and EPA 

Pat Cook 



MDARD information for restaurants 

MDARD, DHHS, and 
DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 


5. 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 



Approve Flint plan for water line 


Mike Prysby 

Chlorination/disinfection 
of 72-inch main begun 

7. 

Lead education plan for schools for 
drinking water 

DHHS and DEQ 

Liane Shekter Smith 


8. 

Begin regular meetings with Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Request made on 
10/12/15; waiting for 
response 

9. 

Schedule Water Treatment Plant 
tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Request made on 
10/12/15; waiting for 
response 

10. 

Meet with schools and DLARA - 
invitation only 

DEQ, DLARA, and Flint 
schools 

Karen Tommasulo 


11. 

Update DEQ Web page 

DEQ 

Karen Tommasulo 

Done 10/12/15 

12. 

Contact DHHS to see where they 
are with United Way regarding 
emergency declaration 

DEQ and DHHS 

George Krisztian 

Request made on 
morning of 10/13/15 

13. 

Circulate protocol draft with EPA 

DEQ and EPA 

Liane Shekter Smith 


14. 

Contact city about homeowner 
sample delivery 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 



FQ1A EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 13, 2015 


1 









































Step No. 

Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

15. 

Communicate to MDARD and Flint 
that business samples should be 
coordinated though DEQ laboratory 

DEQ, MDARD, and Flint 

Liane Shekter Smith 
George Krisztian 

Liane to call MDARD 
and 

George to call Flint 

16. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Liane Shekter Smith 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 


17. 

Confirm Linda Dykema is Point of 
Contact for DHHS 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Done 

18. 

Contact KWA to find out if there are 
any bottlenecks we need to remove 

DEQ and KWA 

Mike Prysby 


19. 

Expedite 399 Plan and Phosphate 
Plan 

DEQ and Flint 

Mike Prysby 


20. 

Get update on service line index 
card conversion and identify where 
partial replacements exist 

DEQ and Flint 

Steve Busch 


21. 

Make sure DHHS gets information 
so they can cross reference 

DEQ and DHHS 

Steve Busch 


22. 

Legislative contacts 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 

Conference call with 
Sen. Jim Ananich 
conducted on 1 0/1 2/1 5 

23. 

Legislative time line and summary 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 


24. 

Reconnect with State 
Superintendent Brian Whiston 

DEQ and Department of 
Education 

Dan Wyant 

Conference call 
conducted on 1 0/1 2/1 5 

25. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

To be scheduled for 
1 0/1 5/1 5 

26. 

Change Part 54 of NREPA - 
Drinking Water Revolving Loan 
Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
Liane Shekter Smith 
Sonya Butler 



F01A EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 13, 2015 


2 





































Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


Coordinating Efforts Meeting on October 12, 2015 


DEQ, DFIHS, and DLARA met to discuss coordinating efforts for the Flint Action Plan. 

Issues discussed were: 

• Flint is in the process of prioritizing schools for lead and copper testing. Should 
have list by COB October 14, 2015. 

• Flint is sending out 3 rd quarter reports incorporating input from the Technical 
Advisory Committee. 

• Weekly meetings are being set up with agency points of contact from DEQ, 
DHHS, and DLARA. These contacts are: 

George Krisztian (DEQ) 

Linda Dykema (DHHS) 

Shelly Edgerton (DLARA) 

• DEQ is in the process of setting up weekly meetings with Mayor Dayne Walling. 
DHHS and DLARA will name representatives for these meetings. The initial 
meetings will be face-to-face, and then the use of conference calls will be 
evaluated later. 

• DEQ is setting up a tour of the Flint Water Treatment Plant. Representatives 
from DHHS and DLARA will be included. 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Tele phone: 517-284-6719 
Cell: 

October 13, 2015 





From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Tuesday, October IB, 2015 4:14 PM 
Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Flint Timeline 

1st letter to blend.pdf; 2nd request to blend.pdf; KWAApproval.pdf; Kurtz KWA.pdf; 
DWSD Termination Ltr.pdf 


Importance: 


High 


Can we put into Gov's briefing tonight? 

Kurtz was EM at time of final decision/move to switch to KWA. Earley was EM at time of switch to Flint River water. 


Flint EM dates (financial emergency declared in December 2011) 

Mike Brown, apptd 12-1-11 (when fin emer declared under PA 4 of 2011) 

Ed Kurtz, apptd 8-8-12 (when PA4 was repealed in Aug 2012, Brown couldn't serve as EM, PA 72 back in 
effect) 

Mike Brown, apptd 7-4-13 (Kurtz retired; PA436 in effect) 

Darnell Earley, apptd 10-8-13 (Brown resigned) 

Gerald Ambrose, apptd 1-13-15 (Earley appointed DPS EM) 

Financial Emergency resolved, 4-29-15 (RTAB apptd) 

Other dates 

June 26, 2012 - Letter from EM Brown to DWSD seeking permission to blend river water with DWSD 
water (attached). 

Sept. 20, 2012 - Letter from EM Kurtz to DWSD requesting written permission to implement blending 
(attached). 

March 25, 2013 - The Flint City Council endorses joining KWA (see url below) 

http://blog.mlive.com/newsnow impact/print.html?entry=/2013/03/flint city council approves re.ht 
ml 

April 11, 2013 - Treasurer Dillion sends letter to EM Kurtz (attached) noting conditional approval of 
move to KWA (pursuant to PA436), pending a review of DWSD's last, best offer. 

April 16, 2013 - EM Kurtz informs Treasury that the City will join KWA (attached). 

April 17, 2013 - DWSD transmits letter to EM Kurtz terminating service to Flint, effective April 17, 2014 
(attached). 

April 17, 2014 - Water service from DWSD officially ends. 


l 



2 



hng 


Michael K, Brown 
Emergency Manager 


Howard D. Croft 
Director 


June 26, 2012 

Sue F, McCormick 
Director DWSD 
735 Randolph St 
Detroit, MS 48226 

Dear Ms, McCormick, 

In cooperation with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality [MDEQ] and city engineers, the City of 
Flint has undertaken a review of the regulatory requirements necessary to supply water to our residential and 
commercial customers. As part of our evaluation it was determined that the Flint Water Treatment Plant is 
capable of successfully "blending" or "co-mlngiing" water sources while continuing to provide quality drinking 
water to citizens. 

The Flint Water Treatment Plant would require approximately $1,3 million dollars In increased expenses in 
order to blend as much as one third (1 /3) of treated river water with two thirds (2 /3) of treated DWSD water. 
Using the 2013 DWSD rates this would result In savings of between two and three million dollars annually 
based on current usage data. The MDEQ has provided Flint with written documentation supporting our 
blending of water sources and the potential benefit 

Given this information we respectfully request written permission from DWSD to proceed with 
blending treated Flint River Water with treated DWSD water. 

it should be understood that our goal is to deliver both high quality and economically viable water to our 
customers. This goal has led us to fully consider all available options including purchasing water from the 
Karegnondi Water Authority and use of the Flint River, We believe that in order for an option with DWSD to be 
successful it is essential that along with the proposed authorization to blend water that there is a guaran teed 
containment of the new "fixed costs” that exist in the current fee structure. The new DWSD fixed charge of 
$707,000 each month regardless of amount of water used is five times the original $143,000 each month 
instituted only two years ago. This has resulted In the cost of water from DWSD dropping in recent years as die 
overall fee has increased annually by millions although our usage has continued to decline. The continuation of 
this trend would render our request and goals invalid. 


With the current Emergency Manager condition in Flint we believe that limiting an agreement to only three 
years is appropriate. This time frame would also serve as an evaluation period prior to any proposed long term 
agreement being considered. 

We appreciate your consideration and look forward to working together. 


Michael K, Brown 

Emergency Financial Manager Flint, Mi. 


CITY HALL 1101 S, SAGINAW STREET FUNT, MICHIGAN 48502 TEL: 810-78S-7138 FAX; 810-768-7249 



Sue F, McCormick 8 > DWSD Board 
Director DWSD 
735 Randolph Street 
Detroit, Ml 48228 


Dear DWSD Board; 


During the past nine months we have had several discussions with DWSD 
representatives regarding future water rates and other options including permission for 
Flint to blend treated water from DWSD, Flint currently has received written 
documentation from the state regulatory agency DEQ supporting the ability for Flint to 
safely blend treated water from Detroit. 

in an effort to move forward we must have a written response from the DWSD Board 
that clearly states the following; 

Will DWSD allow Flint to blend treated water from Detroit? 

What are the rates given an estimated usage by Flint and Genesee County of: 

* 23 MGD Average Daily Usage 
® 40 MOD Maximum Day Usage 


We are requesting this information be delivered to Flint no later than October 1, 2012 
so that we may evaluate all of our options and begin moving forward. 



City Hail 

1 101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint,. Mfdsigsn 48502 
ttl$--766~?346 FAX: M 0-766-72 IS w^v.d;yoftlinl-:a!n 



RICK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 


State of Michigan 

DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY 

Lansing 


ANDY DILLON 
STATE TREASURER 


Mr. Edward Kurtz April 11,2013 

Emergency Manager 
City of Flint 

1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 

Dear Mr. Kurtz: 

Thank you for your March 29, 2013 letter, which is attached for reference. As the Emergency 
Manager for the City of Flint (“Flint” or “City”), you have asked for my concurrence, pursuant to 
Public Act 436 of 2012, the Local Financial Stability and Choice Act, to authorize a contract in 
excess of $50,000.00 not subject to competitive bidding. This request was related to the City 
entering into an agreement with the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) for provision of raw 
water for the City. 

In considering your request, I took note of the following facts in support of Flint joining KWA. 
First, there is widespread support in the City for this move, including the support of the Mayor, 
the City Council, and the Emergency Manager. Second, this move will provide a unique 
opportunity for the City and County to partner on an important project, which will hopefully lead 
to future regional collaboration. Third, the Department of Environmental Quality is supportive of 
the City participating in the KWA project. Finally, your representations that this deal will lead to 
substantial savings for the City over the coming decades, savings that are desperately needed to 
help with the turnaround of the City of Flint. 

It is my understanding that the Detroit Water and Sewer Department is making a final best offer 
to Genesee County and the City of Flint next Monday, April 15, 2013. As such, this approval 
will be effective at 5 pm on April 16, 2013 after receiving written notice from the City that either 
no such offer was presented to the county and the City or that an offer was received and was 
rejected in good faith based upon specified objections. 

For the reasons described above and subject to the conditions set forth herein, pursuant to 
Section 12 (3) of PA 436 of 2012, 1 am authorizing you to proceed with adopting the resolution 
and entering into a contract with KWA. 



P.O. BOX 30716 » LANSING, MICHIGAN 48909 
www.michigan.gov/treasury • (517) 373-3200 




CITY OF FLINT 

OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGER 
EDWARD J. KURTZ 


ELECTRONIC LETTER 
April 18, 2013 


Andy Dion 
Stale Treasurer 
P. O. Box 30718 
Lansing, Ml 48309 


Dear I reasurer Dion; 

Flint, Genesee County and KWA received an eight page letter from Detroit Water and 
Sewerage Department (DWSD) offering a framework for a long-term agreement with 
our region. Two scenarios were presented; 


This offer was dismissed immediately because Flint would still be responsible for their 
share of the KWA water pipeline delivery system estimated to be $78 million. In 
addition Flint wouid not be able to operate the Hint Water Riant in which we have 
invested over $40 million per IMDEG mandates over the past ten years. Finally, 
although DWSD shows this as an option and supplied a per month cost projection for 
the first year, no total costs over the life of the contract were provided. 

Scenario 2; Tull Service" Water Supply 

This offer was also rejected, DWSD would supply water to Flint/Genesee the same way 
they currently are today. They wouid change the method of calculating our bill The 
offer would provide a $100 per ccf reduction on our usage for the first year, providing a 
30 year contract is signed. 

After review of the offer, Flint/Genesee has the following concerns: 


City list! 

UOl S. Sagtaaw Street -Flint, Michigan 48502 
. .$.10-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7238 wwwxltvoMfeu.com 



Andy Dillon, State Treasurer 
April 18, 2013 
Page 2 


1 , DWSD’s offer is a framework subject to negotiations and Is not a firm offer. 


2. DWSD’s offer is based on 40.8 mgd, the KWA plan is based on SO mgd. 
Fiinf/Genasee last summer hit the peak of 40.8 mgd and this DWSD offer 
provides no room for growth. Growth would result in penalties or added cost 

3, DWSD's offer does not include a guaranteed rate for years two through thirty, nor 
does it provide a maximum annual increase. 


4. DWSD’s offer does not provide a redundant supply for GCDG. 

5. DWSD’s offer does not allow for the use of Flint’s existing water plant. 

8. The offer indicates that the tote! cost to Flint over the life of the contract would be 
$587,990,688. No indication of what annual rate of Increase was used in this 
projection. Flint can only assume it b 4.4% based on the Tucker Young report. It 
is also based on 40.8 mgds. KWA's proposal is for $643,775,188 based on 
SOrngds (33% more). Based on 80 mgds DWSD’s proposal would be 
$868,350,738. 

On a final note, Flint/Genesee has great concern over the accuracy of the figures 
provided by DWSD. Attachment 1 indicates that our joint annual cost to DWSD is $50 
million; actual cost Is less than $25 million. Attachment 2 indicates $800 million in 
savings over the next 30 years. That Is greater than the total cost we would pay DWSD, 

Therefore, I will sign the resolution to join KWA at the close of business today. 



Edward J. Kurtz 
Emergency Manager 



Otyx>? Di'TRo- s; 

WAi'iM ANT:** SiAVKITAUk Di-TAK!%«iN r 

Qmcs rat DmtiCiW, 


735 Hanstou"; Strcht 
Orison - . VhemvAM 4322 n 




: 


, MM1 attfl. Electronic Delivery 

Ms, Inez M. Brown 
& i 






City of Flint 
2nd Floor, City Hall 
1101 S. Saginaw Street 
Flint Michigan 48502 

Dear Ms.Brown: 

F^a^diiigf Ceratittali 
by the Cf 


on of Contract for the Provision of Water Services 
of Detroit, Water and Sewerage 


On December 20, 1965, the City of Detroit, through its Board of Water Commissioners, 
(DWSD) and the City of Flint, Michigan (Flint) entered into a contract for the provision of 
DWSD treated water to Flint and the distribution by flint of that water to other Genesee County 
communities. Section 18 of that Agreement 1 provides: 

18. The Board [DWSD] shall supply and sell water to the City [Flint] from the water system of 
the City of Detroit, and the City shall receive and purchase such water in accordance with the 
terms of this Agreement for an indefinite period of time but at least for a period of thirty-five 
(35) t^ears from the date hereof. This Agreement may be terminated by either party after 
expiration of said 35-vear period, upon one year' s written notice sewed upon the other party by 
delivering the same to the Secretary of the Board or to the Clerk of the City as the case may be, 
or at any time upon mutual consent of both parties. 

Please take notice that pursuant to this section, 18, of the above-referenced Agreement, DWSD is 
terminating this Agreement one year from today’s date (April 17, 2014). 


Sincereiy yours. 


c: 


y 


Sue F , McCormick 
Director 


Aithc 


full e 


ougb She Agreement D WSP has Mfodcf aShily Section <8 remains unchanged and in 

effect. 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Wednesday, October 14, 2015 1:12 PM 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 
(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

2015-10-14 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 
CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

2015-10-14 Action Steps Week of October 12-16.pdf; 2015-10-14 Flint Drinking 
Water Action Plan Update.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 12-16 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Identify schools and prioritize for 
assessment 

GCISD, GCHD, DEQ, 
DHHS, and Flint 

Steve Busch 

Completed 

2. 

Get DLARA plumbers organized 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 

DLARA inspectors are 
ready 

3. 

Complete sampling instructions 

DEQ, DHHS, and EPA 

Pat Cook 


4. 

MDARD information for restaurants 

MDARD, DHHS, and DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 

Comments provided 
to MDARD 

5. 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 


6. 

Approve Flint plan for water line 

DEQ, Flint, and Genesee 
County 

Mike Prysby 

Disinfection complete; 
waiting for test results 
and completion of 
system flushing 

7. 

Lead education plan for schools for 
drinking water 

DHHS and DEQ 

Liane Shekter Smith 

DEQ working with 
DHHS to determine 
who will be the lead 

8. 

Begin regular meetings with Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Meeting tentatively 
scheduled for 
10/16/15 

9. 

Schedule Flint Water Treatment 
Plant tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Tour tentatively 
scheduled for 
10/16/15 

10. 

Meet with schools and DLARA - 
invitation only 

DEQ, DLARA, and Flint 
schools 

Karen Tommasulo 


11. 

Update DEQ Web page 

DEQ 

Karen Tommasulo 

Done 10/12/15 


FQ1A EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 14, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 






















































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

12. 

Contact DHHS to see where they 
are with United Way regarding 
emergency declaration 

DEQ and DHHS 

George Krisztian 

Completed; DHHS to 
notify DEQ if status 
changes 

13. 

Circulate protocol draft with EPA 

DEQ and EPA 

Liane Shekter Smith 


14. 

Contact city about homeowner 
sample delivery 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 


15. 

Communicate to MDARD and Flint 
that business samples should be 
coordinated though DEQ laboratory 

DEQ, MDARD, and Flint 

Liane Shekter Smith 
George Krisztian 

Liane to call MDARD 
and 

George to call Flint 

16. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Liane Shekter Smith 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 


17. 

Confirm Linda Dykema is Point of 
Contact for DHHS 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Done 

18. 

Contact Karegnondi Water Authority 
(KWA) to find out if there are any 
bottlenecks we need to remove 

DEQ and KWA 

Mike Prysby 

Further discussions 
with Lapeer County 
may need to take 
place 

19. 

Expedite 399 Plan and Phosphate 
Plan 

DEQ and Flint 

Mike Prysby 

Corrosion control 
optimization studies in 
process 

20. 

Get update on service line index 
card conversion and identify where 
partial replacements exist 

DEQ and Flint 

Steve Busch 


21. 

Make sure DHHS gets information 
so they can cross reference 

DEQ and DHHS 

Steve Busch 


22. 

Legislative contacts 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 

Conference call with 
Sen. Jim Ananich 
conducted on 
10/12/15 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 1 4, 201 5 
















































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

23. 

Legislative time line and summary 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 

Provided 

backgrounder and 
time line to legislators 
on 1 0/1 3/1 5 ' 

24. 

Reconnect with State 
Superintendent Brian Whiston 

DEQ and Department of 
Education 

Dan Wyant 

Conference call 
conducted on 
10/12/15 

25. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

To be scheduled for 
10/15/15 

26. 

Change Part 54 of NREPA - 
Drinking Water Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
Liane Shekter Smith 
Sonya Butler 



City of Flint Water Action Steps 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

3 October 14, 2015 

























Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• The preliminary list of schools is completed, has been circulated to DHFIS, and 
has been provided to DLARA to begin plumbing assessments. The list will 
remain active in case of additional schools requesting assessment/testing. 

• DLARA to coordinate with Flint Schools on access for plumbing assessments. 
Tap coding identification from U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
guidance to be provided to DLARA. 

• Preliminary comments on sampling instructions were received by voice mail from 
EPA. Need to discuss directly. 

• DEQ comments provided to MDARD on information for restaurants, and a draft 
was forwarded to DHHS for their comments. 

• Approve Flint plan for water line - The city of Flint and Genesee County flushed 
the pipeline beginning October 13; the first set of samples for total coliform 
analysis was collected around 2:30 a.m. Genesee County planned to collect 
their second sample for bacteriological analysis between 6 and 8 p.m. last night. 
It may take additional time to flush the Dort Reservoir before it is ready to be 
sampled and may set back the time that the pipeline is ready to be placed into 
operation (October 15 is the soonest possible). The yard piping configuration at 
the Flint Water Treatment Plant does allow for flexibility in operation and ability to 
take Dort out of service and maintain supply from Detroit; however, we have not 
been able to confirm that this is the way Flint plans to proceed. 

• An e-mail was sent to DHHS regarding the lead education plan for schools for 
drinking water to determine if DEQ or DHHS will be the lead and to determine 
how this effort will be coordinated with broader lead education/outreach efforts. 

• The city of Flint has been contacted regarding scheduling regular meetings with 
DEQ, and the initial meeting is tentatively scheduled for Friday, October 16. 

• The city of Flint has been contacted to schedule a tour of the Flint Water 
Treatment Plant. It is tentatively scheduled to occur in conjunction with the initial 
meeting. Logistics may require postponement until the week of October 19. 

• DHHS has been contacted, and they have indicated that as of 9:30 a.m. on 
October 13, there has been no formal request for an emergency declaration. 




FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


• John O’Brien, Genesee County Drain Commissioner’s office, was contacted. 

The most significant bottleneck to expedite completion of the Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) pipeline involves road restrictions currently being imposed by 
the Lapeer County Road Commission and include: 

o All Lapeer County secondary north-south roads are tagged “no 

construction traffic” for this project except for primary roads (M-19, M-53, 
and M-24). This significantly increases distances that construction 
vehicles must travel (upwards of 15 to 20 miles) to accomplish a short jog 
either north or south. 

o Weight restrictions in the spring will cause construction to slow or stop for 
one to two months. Lapeer County has indicated that St. Clair and 
Sanilac are not imposing the weight restrictions; however, Lapeer County 
will maintain their restrictions. 

• DEQ staff indicated there is another potentially serious bottleneck concerning 
construction of the KWA pipeline. A “stop-work” order could be coming soon 
from the Lapeer County Road Commission. 

• Samir Matta from Lockwood, Andrews & Newnam, Inc. (LAN), Flint’s consultant, 
was contacted for an update on the corrosion control plan and submittal of the 
Act 399 permit application. Flint operators, with the assistance of LAN, 
conducted bench tests using a corrosion inhibitor (orthophosphate) and are 
making comparisons for use with (treated water from Detroit vs. water treated 
from the Flint River). LAN is currently preparing plans and a design for 
installation of an orthophosphate feed system. LAN expects to submit the 

Act 399 permit application to the DEQ by no later than the end of this week. 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Tele phone: 517-284 -671 9 
Cell: 

October 14, 2015 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ) 

Thursday, October 15, 2015 1:51 PM 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 
(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

2015-10-15 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 
CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

2015-10-15 Action Steps Week of October 12-16.pdf; 2015-10-15 Flint Drinking 
Water Action Plan Update.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 12-16 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Identify schools and prioritize for 
assessment 

GCISD, GCHD, DEQ, 
DHHS, and Flint 

Steve Busch 

Completed 

2. 

Get DLARA plumbers organized 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 

DLARA inspectors are 
ready 

3. 

Complete sampling instructions 

DEQ, DHHS, and EPA 

Pat Cook 


4. 

MDARD information for restaurants 

MDARD, DHHS, and DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 

Completed; document 
in review process for 
Web site 

5. 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 


6. 

Approve Flint plan for water line 

DEQ, Flint, and Genesee 
County 

Mike Prysby 

1st sample set results 
were not detected; 
2nd sample set 
results are pending; 
determination of flush 
water disposal 
pending by Flint 

7. 

Lead education plan for schools for 
drinking water 

DHHS and DEQ 

Liane Shekter Smith 

DEQ working with 
DHHS to determine 
who will be the lead 

8. 

Begin regular meetings with Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Meeting confirmed 
and scheduled for 
10/16/15 


FQIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 15, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 










































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

9. 

Schedule Flint Water Treatment 
Plant tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Tour tentatively 
scheduled for 
10/16/15; waiting on 
confirmation 

10. 

Meet with schools and DLARA - 
invitation only 

DEQ, DLARA, and Flint 
schools 

Karen Tommasulo 


11. 

Update DEQ Web page 

DEQ 

Karen Tommasulo 

Done 10/12/15 

12. 

Contact DHHS to see where they 
are with United Way regarding 
emergency declaration 

DEQ and DHHS 

George Krisztian 

Completed; DHHS to 
notify DEQ if status 
changes 

13. 

Circulate protocol draft with EPA 

DEQ and EPA 

Liane Shekter Smith 

Initial draft completed; 
comments received 
from EPA 

14. 

Contact city about homeowner 
sample delivery 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 


15. 

Communicate to MDARD and Flint 
that business samples should be 
coordinated though DEQ laboratory 

DEQ, MDARD, and Flint 

Liane Shekter Smith 
George Krisztian 

Liane to call MDARD 
and 

George to call Flint 

16. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Liane Shekter Smith 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 


17. 

Confirm Linda Dykema is Point of 
Contact for DHHS 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Done 

18. 

Contact Karegnondi Water Authority 
(KWA) to find out if there are any 
bottlenecks we need to remove 

DEQ and KWA 

Mike Prysby 

Bottlenecks identified 
with Lapeer County 
Road Commission 

19. 

Expedite 399 Plan and Phosphate 
Plan 

DEQ and Flint 

Mike Prysby 

Corrosion control 
optimization studies in 
process 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 1 5, 201 5 




















































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

20. 

Get update on service line index 
card conversion and identify where 
partial replacements exist 

DEQ and Flint 

Steve Busch 


21. 

Make sure DHHS gets information 
so they can cross reference 

DEQ and DHHS 

Steve Busch 


22. 

Legislative contacts 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 

Supplemental 
appropriations bill 
(HB 4102) passed in 
the House 105-0 
(10/14/15) and the 
Senate 37-0 
(10/1 5/15) 

23. 

Legislative time line and summary 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 

Provided 

backgrounder and 
time line to legislators 
on 1 0/1 3/1 5 

24. 

Reconnect with State 
Superintendent Brian Whiston 

DEQ and Department of 
Education 

Dan Wyant 

Conference call 
conducted on 
10/12/15 

25. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting to be 
scheduled for week of 
10/19/15 

26. 

Change Part 54 of NREPA - 
Drinking Water Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
Liane Shekter Smith 
Sonya Butler 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 3 October 1 5, 201 5 



































Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• Supplemental appropriations bill (Flouse Bill 4102) passed in the House 105-0 on 
October 14 and in the Senate 37-0 on October 15. 

• E-mail sent to DLARA with draft sampling ID protocol. 

• E-mail drafted with request for schools to prepare documents/information ahead 
of DLARA visit and on-site assessment. Waiting for comments. 

• MDARD incorporated input from DEQ for the guidance document to restaurants. 
The final version is being reviewed for inclusion on the Web site. 

• The pipeline was flushed, and the 1 st round of samples for bacteriological 
analysis collected yesterday (4:00 a.m. at mid-point and 7:30 a.m. at CS #3 - 
Flint Water Treatment Plant) were non-detect for total coliform. 

• The 2nd round of samples were collected yesterday evening at mid-point 
(Genesee County) and late last night at CS #3 (Flint). Results will be available 
later this evening and read first thing tomorrow morning. If the 2nd set of 
samples is all clear, the pipeline will be ready to be placed into service (from a 
technical standpoint). The pipeline, however, will not be placed into service until 
Flint, Genesee County, and Detroit agree on and establish a service contract. 

• The Dort Reservoir will not be placed into service (this facility can be bypassed) 
until Flint determines what to do with the 6 million gallons of water (chlorinated at 
approximately 1 00 parts per million). What they thought was a connection to the 
sanitary sewer was discovered yesterday to be a connection to the storm sewer. 

• The first weekly meeting with the city of Flint has been scheduled for October 1 6. 
Attendees will include: Natasha Henderson (city of Flint), George Krisztian 
(DEQ), Shelly Edgerton (DLARA), Linda Dykema (DHHS), and Dr. Eden Wells 
(DHHS). 

• A tour of the Flint Water Treatment Plant has been requested and tentatively 
scheduled for October 16. We are waiting for confirmation from city of Flint 
officials. Due to potential scheduling conflicts, this may be rescheduled for the 
week of October 19. 

• The initial draft of the sampling protocol has been submitted to EPA, and 
comments have been received. 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


• Potential bottlenecks have been identified regarding load restrictions. Further 
discussions with the Lapeer County Road Commission will be necessary to 
identify potential accommodations. 

Additional action: 

Outreach was made to the Genesee County Health Department (GCHD) to ask for 
assistance with the sampling of Flint schools. The GCHD has expressed some 
reservations, and further communication will take place to strengthen the partnership. 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Tele phone: 517-284-6 71 9 
Cell: 

October 15, 2015 


From: Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ) 

Sent: Thursday, October 15, 2015 1:56 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth (GOV); 

Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

Subject: 201 5-1 0-1 5 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 

CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 2015-10-15 Action Steps Week of October 12-16.pdf; 2015-10-15 Flint Drinking Water Action 

Plan Update.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 12-16 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Identify schools and prioritize for 
assessment 

GCISD, GCHD, DEQ, 
DHHS, and Flint 

Steve Busch 

Completed 

2. 

Get DLARA plumbers organized 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 

DLARA inspectors are 
ready 

3. 

Complete sampling instructions 

DEQ, DHHS, and EPA 

Pat Cook 


4. 

MDARD information for restaurants 

MDARD, DHHS, and DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 

Completed; document 
in review process for 
Web site 

5. 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 


6. 

Approve Flint plan for water line 

DEQ, Flint, and Genesee 
County 

Mike Prysby 

1st sample set results 
were not detected; 
2nd sample set 
results are pending; 
determination of flush 
water disposal 
pending by Flint 

7. 

Lead education plan for schools for 
drinking water 

DHHS and DEQ 

Liane Shekter Smith 

DEQ working with 
DHHS to determine 
who will be the lead 

8. 

Begin regular meetings with Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Meeting confirmed 
and scheduled for 
10/16/15 


FQIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 15, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 










































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

9. 

Schedule Flint Water Treatment 
Plant tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Tour tentatively 
scheduled for 
10/16/15; waiting on 
confirmation 

10. 

Meet with schools and DLARA - 
invitation only 

DEQ, DLARA, and Flint 
schools 

Karen Tommasulo 


11. 

Update DEQ Web page 

DEQ 

Karen Tommasulo 

Done 10/12/15 

12. 

Contact DHHS to see where they 
are with United Way regarding 
emergency declaration 

DEQ and DHHS 

George Krisztian 

Completed; DHHS to 
notify DEQ if status 
changes 

13. 

Circulate protocol draft with EPA 

DEQ and EPA 

Liane Shekter Smith 

Initial draft completed; 
comments received 
from EPA 

14. 

Contact city about homeowner 
sample delivery 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 


15. 

Communicate to MDARD and Flint 
that business samples should be 
coordinated though DEQ laboratory 

DEQ, MDARD, and Flint 

Liane Shekter Smith 
George Krisztian 

Liane to call MDARD 
and 

George to call Flint 

16. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Liane Shekter Smith 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 


17. 

Confirm Linda Dykema is Point of 
Contact for DHHS 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Done 

18. 

Contact Karegnondi Water Authority 
(KWA) to find out if there are any 
bottlenecks we need to remove 

DEQ and KWA 

Mike Prysby 

Bottlenecks identified 
with Lapeer County 
Road Commission 

19. 

Expedite 399 Plan and Phosphate 
Plan 

DEQ and Flint 

Mike Prysby 

Corrosion control 
optimization studies in 
process 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 1 5, 201 5 




















































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

20. 

Get update on service line index 
card conversion and identify where 
partial replacements exist 

DEQ and Flint 

Steve Busch 


21. 

Make sure DHHS gets information 
so they can cross reference 

DEQ and DHHS 

Steve Busch 


22. 

Legislative contacts 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 

Supplemental 
appropriations bill 
(HB 4102) passed in 
the House 105-0 
(10/14/15) and the 
Senate 37-0 
(10/1 5/15) 

23. 

Legislative time line and summary 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 

Provided 

backgrounder and 
time line to legislators 
on 1 0/1 3/1 5 

24. 

Reconnect with State 
Superintendent Brian Whiston 

DEQ and Department of 
Education 

Dan Wyant 

Conference call 
conducted on 
10/12/15 

25. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting to be 
scheduled for week of 
10/19/15 

26. 

Change Part 54 of NREPA - 
Drinking Water Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
Liane Shekter Smith 
Sonya Butler 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 3 October 1 5, 201 5 



































Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• Supplemental appropriations bill (Flouse Bill 4102) passed in the House 105-0 on 
October 14 and in the Senate 37-0 on October 15. 

• E-mail sent to DLARA with draft sampling ID protocol. 

• E-mail drafted with request for schools to prepare documents/information ahead 
of DLARA visit and on-site assessment. Waiting for comments. 

• MDARD incorporated input from DEQ for the guidance document to restaurants. 
The final version is being reviewed for inclusion on the Web site. 

• The pipeline was flushed, and the 1 st round of samples for bacteriological 
analysis collected yesterday (4:00 a.m. at mid-point and 7:30 a.m. at CS #3 - 
Flint Water Treatment Plant) were non-detect for total coliform. 

• The 2nd round of samples were collected yesterday evening at mid-point 
(Genesee County) and late last night at CS #3 (Flint). Results will be available 
later this evening and read first thing tomorrow morning. If the 2nd set of 
samples is all clear, the pipeline will be ready to be placed into service (from a 
technical standpoint). The pipeline, however, will not be placed into service until 
Flint, Genesee County, and Detroit agree on and establish a service contract. 

• The Dort Reservoir will not be placed into service (this facility can be bypassed) 
until Flint determines what to do with the 6 million gallons of water (chlorinated at 
approximately 1 00 parts per million). What they thought was a connection to the 
sanitary sewer was discovered yesterday to be a connection to the storm sewer. 

• The first weekly meeting with the city of Flint has been scheduled for October 1 6. 
Attendees will include: Natasha Henderson (city of Flint), George Krisztian 
(DEQ), Shelly Edgerton (DLARA), Linda Dykema (DHHS), and Dr. Eden Wells 
(DHHS). 

• A tour of the Flint Water Treatment Plant has been requested and tentatively 
scheduled for October 16. We are waiting for confirmation from city of Flint 
officials. Due to potential scheduling conflicts, this may be rescheduled for the 
week of October 19. 

• The initial draft of the sampling protocol has been submitted to EPA, and 
comments have been received. 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


• Potential bottlenecks have been identified regarding load restrictions. Further 
discussions with the Lapeer County Road Commission will be necessary to 
identify potential accommodations. 

Additional action: 

Outreach was made to the Genesee County Health Department (GCHD) to ask for 
assistance with the sampling of Flint schools. The GCHD has expressed some 
reservations, and further communication will take place to strengthen the partnership. 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telep hone: 517-284 -671 9 
Cell: 

Octo be^^^OT^^ 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Friday, October 16, 2015 11:03 AM 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 
(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

2015-10-16 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 
CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

2015-10-16 Action Steps Week of October 12-16.pdf; 2015-10-16 Flint Drinking 
Water Action Plan Update.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 12-16 


Step No. 

Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Identify schools and prioritize for 
assessment 

GCISD, GCHD, DEQ, 
DHHS, and Flint 

Steve Busch 

Completed 

2. 

Get DLARA plumbers organized 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 

DLARA inspectors are 
ready 

3. 

Complete sampling instructions 

DEQ, DHHS, and EPA 

Pat Cook 

Incorporating 
comments from 
partners 

4. 

MDARD information for restaurants 

MDARD, DHHS, and DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 

Completed; document 
in review process for 
Web site 

5. 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 


6. 

Approve Flint plan for water line 

DEQ, Flint, and Genesee 
County 

Mike Prysby 

1st sample set results 
were not detected; 
2nd sample set 
results were not 
detected; 

determination of flush 
water disposal 
pending by Flint 

7. 

Lead education plan for schools for 
drinking water 

DHHS and DEQ 

Liane Shekter Smith 

DEQ working with 
DHHS to determine 
who will be the lead 

8. 

Begin regular meetings with Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

1st meeting 
scheduled for 
10/16/15 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 16, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 























Step No. 

Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

9. 

Schedule Flint Water Treatment 
Plant tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

To be scheduled for 
week of 10/19/15; 
waiting on 

confirmation from Flint 

10. 

Meet with schools and DLARA - 
invitation only 

DEQ, DLARA, and Flint 
schools 

Karen Tommasulo 


11. 

Update DEQ Web page 

DEQ 

Karen Tommasulo 

Done 10/12/15 

12. 

Contact DHHS to see where they 
are with United Way regarding 
emergency declaration 

DEQ and DHHS 

George Krisztian 

Completed; DHHS to 
notify DEQ if status 
changes 

13. 

Circulate protocol draft with EPA 

DEQ and EPA 

Liane Shekter Smith 

Initial draft completed; 
comments received 
from EPA 

14. 

Contact city about homeowner 
sample delivery 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Done 

15. 

Communicate to MDARD and Flint 
that business samples should be 
coordinated though DEQ laboratory 

DEQ, MDARD, and Flint 

Liane Shekter Smith 
George Krisztian 

Liane to call MDARD; 
George called Flint 

16. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Liane Shekter Smith 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 


17. 

Confirm Linda Dykema is Point of 
Contact for DHHS 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Done 

18. 

Contact Karegnondi Water Authority 
(KWA) to find out if there are any 
bottlenecks we need to remove 

DEQ and KWA 

Mike Prysby 

Bottlenecks identified 
with Lapeer County 
Road Commission 

19. 

Expedite 399 Plan and Phosphate 
Plan 

DEQ and Flint 

Mike Prysby 

Corrosion control 
optimization studies in 
process 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 1 6, 201 5 













































Step No. 

Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

20. 

Get update on service line index 
card conversion and identify where 
partial replacements exist 

DEQ and Flint 

Steve Busch 

To be discussed at 
10/16/15 meeting with 
Flint 

21. 

Make sure DHHS gets information 
so they can cross reference 

DEQ and DHHS 

Steve Busch 

To be discussed at 
10/16/15 meeting with 
Flint 

22. 

Legislative contacts 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 

Supplemental 
appropriations bill 
(HB 4102) passed in 
the House 105-0 
(10/14/15) and the 
Senate 37-0 
(10/1 5/15) 

23. 

Legislative time line and summary 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 

Provided 

backgrounder and 
time line to legislators 
on 1 0/1 3/1 5 ' 

24. 

Reconnect with State 
Superintendent Brian Whiston 

DEQ and Department of 
Education 

Dan Wyant 

Conference call 
conducted on 
10/12/15 

25. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting to be 
scheduled for week of 
10/19/15 

26. 

Change Part 54 of NREPA - 
Drinking Water Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
Liane Shekter Smith 
Sonya Butler 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 3 October 1 6, 201 5 































Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• Based upon discussions with Genesee County and the city of Flint, the portion of 
the 72-inch transmission main (pipeline) that was taken out of service, while the 
Flint Water Treatment Plant treated water from the Flint River, was flushed and 
disinfected in accordance to AWWA Standard C651-14. Two sets of samples 
were collected from two locations 16 hours apart for total coliform analysis. The 
city of Flint and Genesee County have informed the DEQ that both sets of 
samples were non-detect for total coliform. Based upon the disinfection 
procedure and the absence of total coliform from both sets of samples, the 
unused portion of the pipeline may be placed into service. 

• The initial meeting with the city of Flint has been confirmed and scheduled to 
take place at the Flint City Flail today at 1 0:00 a.m. In attendance will be 
representatives from DEQ, DLARA, DHHS, and the city of Flint. The meeting will 
cover progress by each partner to date, along with a discussion of action items 
for next week and the following: 

o Get update on service line index card conversion and identify where 
partial replacements exist 

o Make sure DHHS gets information so they can cross reference 

• Due to scheduling conflicts, the tour of the Flint Water Treatment Plant has been 
postponed until the week of October 1 9. 

• The city of Flint has been contacted regarding the delivery of homeowner 
samples, and it was agreed that the current method of sample delivery was 
mutually beneficial and that the practice would remain in place. 

• The city of Flint has been contacted, and they have agreed to forward all lead 
testing requests by businesses directly to the DEQ laboratory. The DEQ 
laboratory contact information has been provided, and the city of Flint has 
distributed this information to appropriate staff. 

Additional action: 

A meeting has been requested between the DEQ and the Genesee County Health 

Department (GCFID). A request to meet has been sent along with a list of proposed 

agenda items. A proposal for weekly meetings either by phone or in person has been 

made to GCFID so as to strengthen our partnership with them. 


Prepared by: 


George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Tele phone: 517-284-6 71 9 

Celk^^^^^H 

October 16, 2015 



From: 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: 

Monday, October 19, 2015 3:13 PM 

To: 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 
(GOV); Sedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

Subject: 

2015-10-19 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 
CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 

2015-10-19 Action Steps Week of October 19-23.pdf; 2015-10-19 Flint Drinking 
Water Action Plan Update.pdf 

Importance: 

High 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 1 9-23, 201 5 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 19-23 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 


2. 

Schedule Flint Water Treatment 
Plant tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

To be scheduled for 
week of 10/19/15; 
waiting on 

confirmation from Flint 

3. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 


4. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting to be 
scheduled for week of 
10/19/15 

5. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of N RE PA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 


6. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 


7. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


8. 

$1 million for DEQ Laboratory billing 
code 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


9. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 



FQIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 19, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 






































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

10. 

Develop letter to schools 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


11. 

Finalize sampling protocol 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


12. 

Confirm school sampling logistics 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


13. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


14. 

Complete Non-Transient 
Non-Community Water Supply letter 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


15. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


16. 

ODWMA staff observe a DLARA 
plumbing assessment 

DEQ and DLARA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 



City of Flint Water Action Steps 


2 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 19, 2015 




























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

17. 

Develop sample form and chain of 
custody document 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


18. 

Provide Director Wyant with revised 
Part 54 language 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


19. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


20. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


21. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


22. 

Provide city of Flint updated 
monitoring schedule based on 
Detroit Water and Sewerage 
Department (DWSD)/Great Lakes 
Water Authority (GLWA) service 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


23. 

Contact city of Flint and Genesee 
County daily for DWSD connection 
status updates 

DEQ, Flint, and Genesee 
County 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 



City of Flint Water Action Steps 


3 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 19, 2015 





























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

24. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


25. 

Verify city of Flint distribution 
operations under DWSD/GLWA 
service 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


26. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

i CylSJ »1 1 1 fT* 


27. 

Provide DHFIS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


28. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHHS related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 



City of Flint Water Action Steps 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

4 October 19, 2015 





















Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• The Flint pipeline is ready and has been placed into service. Water from the 
Great Lakes Water Authority began flowing on Friday, October 16. 

• Continued working with Karegnondi Water Authority toward addressing the 
construction bottlenecks. 

• The corrosion control proposal was received electronically from Lockwood, 
Andrews & Newnam, Inc. (LAN), Flint’s consultant, on October 16 (without 399 
application). Staff is reviewing the proposal and preparing comments. The 
proposal was forwarded to EPA for their review, with comments requested by 
October 19. EPA acknowledged receipt of the proposal. On October 16 LAN 
hand delivered a full-sized set of the proposal, along with a signed permit 
application. 

• The city of Flint provided information during the initial coordination meeting that 
approximately 25% of the index card conversion has taken place. The cards 
have been given to the University of Michigan-Flint for entry into GIS. The city of 
Flint has indicated that this is a slow process, and they are looking at ways to 
speed up the process. This is a manually intensive process, and they lack the 
resources to accomplish the task faster. 

• The city of Flint will provide a link to the GIS mapping, and Howard Croft of the 
city of Flint gave a short presentation on how to use the GIS mapping program. 

Additional Actions: 

• George Krisztian and Karen Tommasulo represented the DEQ in the initial 
weekly coordination meeting with the city of Flint on October 1 6. Present were 
representatives from DEQ, DLARA, DHHS, and the city of Flint. Each partner 
provided a brief synopsis of what their respective group had done the past week, 
and there was discussion on action steps for the following week. Additional 
discussion included presenting a unified message, creation of a homeowners 
water sampling instructions work group, and inclusion of the Genesee County 
Health Department (GCHD) for the weekly coordination meetings. 

• George Krisztian, Karen Tommasulo, and Liane Shekter Smith represented the 
DEQ in an October 16 meeting with the Flint Community Schools 
Superintendent, Bilal Tawwab. Also present were representatives from DLARA, 
DHHS, and the Principals from the first three schools that are going through the 
plumbing evaluation protocol as well as additional staff from Flint Community 
Schools. The DEQ provided an overview of the protocol that includes a plumbing 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


evaluation, subsequent sampling of all faucets and drinking fountains that are 
used for consumptive purposes, analysis of the samples, consolidation of the 
data, and then review of the data from a health-based exposure perspective. 
There was also discussion that the GCHD would be asked to conduct the 
sampling so that we ensure all aspects of the data are of the highest possible 
quality. There was also discussion of the need to ensure that the 
Superintendent’s office receives the data along with comments on the data 
before the data is made public. It was agreed that all partners (DEQ, DLARA, 
DHHS, the Superintendent, the city of Flint, and GCHD) would all be provided the 
data along with context before the data was released to the public. It was also 
agreed that there needed to be coordination with respect to who would be 
releasing the data to the public. 

• George Krisztian, Karen Tommasulo, and Liane Shekter Smith met on 

October 16 with James Henry of the GCHD. The purpose of the meeting was to: 

o Invite the GCHD to attend the weekly coordination meeting with the city of 
Flint. 

o Ask if the GCHD would be willing to take the samples for the school 
plumbing evaluations. 

o Invite Mr. Henry to be part of the homeowners water sampling instructions 
work group. 

o The GCHD provided a positive response on all three subjects but did 

indicate that they would need funding to assist with the sampling. GCHD 
was asked to submit a request to the DEQ so that the question of funding 
could be addressed formally. 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Tele phone: 517-284-6 71 9 
Cell: 

October 19, 2015 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ) 

Tuesday, October 20, 2015 2:18 PM 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 
(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

2015-10-20 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 
CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

2015-10-20 Action Steps Week of October 19-23.pdf; 2015-10-20 Flint Drinking 
Water Action Plan Update.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 1 9-23, 201 5 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 19-23 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 


2. 

Schedule Flint Water Treatment 
Plant tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

To be scheduled for week of 
10/19/15; waiting on 
confirmation from Flint 

3. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 

1,300 samples (13 schools 
and 100 samples per school) 

4. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting to be 
scheduled for week of 
10/19/15 

5. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of NREPA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

6. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 


7. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


8. 

$1 million for DEQ Laboratory billing 
code 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


9. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 



FQIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 20, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 



































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

10. 

Develop letter to schools 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


11. 

Finalize sampling protocol 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Revised draft sampling 
protocol shared with DLARA, 
DHHS, EPA, and Genesee 
County Health Department on 
1 0/1 9/1 5 for comment 

12. 

Confirm school sampling logistics 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


13. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


14. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


15. 

ODWMA staff observe a DLARA 
plumbing assessment 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Scheduled for 10/21/15 

16. 

Develop sample form and chain of 
custody document 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 20, 201 5 





























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

17. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Initial comments by EPA 
received on 1 0/1 9/1 5; further 
discussions to take place 

18. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


19. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


20. 

Provide city of Flint updated 
monitoring schedule based on 
Detroit Water and Sewerage 
Department (DWSD)/Great Lakes 
Water Authority (GLWA) service 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


21. 

Contact city of Flint and Genesee 
County Health Department daily for 
DWSD connection status updates 

DEQ, Flint, and 
Genesee County 
Health Department 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Switch to DWSD completed 
on 1 0/1 6/1 5; city of Flint will 
let DEQ know if they run into 
any unforeseen issues 

22. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


23. 

Verify city of Flint distribution 
operations under DWSD/GLWA 
service 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 3 October 20, 201 5 




























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

24. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


25. 

Provide DFIHS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


26. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHHS related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 



City of Flint Water Action Steps 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

4 October 20, 2015 















Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• On October 1 6 DEQ staff calculated an estimate for the number of samples that 
we expect to take per school. During our October 16 meeting with Flint 
Community Schools representatives, they supported our assumptions. Based on 
this, we estimate that if we collect 3 samples at each drinking water/cooking tap 
at each school, we can expect to collect approximately 100 samples per school 
(13 schools = 1 ,300 samples). This number is only for the first 1 3 locations that 
were identified in the preliminary investigation. A more comprehensive 
determination of the total number of facilities will be made after the initial pilot of 
3 schools is complete. 

• Draft language changes for Part 54 of the Natural Resources and Environmental 
Protection Act, 1994 PA 451 , as amended, have been submitted to Maggie 
Pallone for review before final submission. 

• The revised draft sampling protocol was shared with DLARA, DHHS, EPA, and 
Genesee County Health Department on October 19 for comment. 

• DEQ’s Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance staff is scheduled to 
observe DLARA staff conducting a plumbing assessment on October 21 . 

• Initial comments by EPA regarding Flint’s proposed corrosion control treatment 
plan were received on October 19. EPA’s comments in their entirety are 
included as an attachment. DEQ staff has been instructed to contact EPA on 
October 20 to get clarification of some of the comments. 

• On October 19 George Krisztian contacted Howard Croft, Public Works Director, 
city of Flint, to find out how the transition to Detroit Water and Sewerage 
Department (DWSD) was going. Mr. Croft indicated that Flint switched over in a 
controlled manner so as to minimize disruptions in the infrastructure. He said 
that the transition went very smoothly and that Flint is on DWSD water 

1 00 percent. Mr. Croft also indicated that they would be doing testing throughout 
the distribution system and they would be focusing on hardness levels to 
determine the extent to which the DWSD water had made it through the system. 
He anticipated that it would be a full week before there was a complete turnover 
of the source water. 

Attachment 

Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Tele phone: 517-284- 671 9 

Cell: Bums! 

October 20, 2015 




From: Lytle, Darren [ mailto: L y tle. Darren @e oa.c o v 1 

Sent: Monday, October 19, 2015 12:05 PM 
To: Prysby, Mike (DEQ) 

Cc: Schock, Michael; Kempic, Jeffrey; Busch, Stephen (DEQ) 

Subject: RE: Flint WTP PH2 SEG4 - Corrosion Control 

Mike, 

Thank-you for giving us the opportunity to review the city of Flint's corrosion control plan. 

We believe it is necessary that Flint boosts orthophosphate dosage. Given that the distribution system 
has not received orthophosphate in over a year, we expect that orthophosphate will need to be boosted 
to 1) meet the demand of the distribution system, 2) reach the service lines and other lead-containing 
components in premise plumbing, and 3) accelerate lead reduction at the consumer’s taps. 
Orthophosphate should preferably be added in the same form as the Detroit source which is phosphoric 
acid from our understanding. This is the proposed case here, however, a simple test should be 
performed to make sure that the pH is not impacted in a significant way at the desired target dose. 


We have not been able to obtain comprehensive water quality data for the finished water 
characteristics of the Detroit water that will be fed to Flint, to assess ranges of major chemical 
characteristic fluctuations. However, based upon the email trail, Detroit water entering the Flint system 
appears to only contain around 0.4 PG4/L. This concentration range is entirely too low compared to that 
needed in studies presented and published in the last 20+ years that have focused on lead released 
directly from lead pipes, and the solubility of the most likely lead orthophosphate pipes scales. We also 
strongly feel that targeted dose of 0.8 mg P04/L is aiso too low, for the very same reason. We would be 
glad to share wi th you numerous standard corrosion control and treatment reference works, best 
practices guides and published results from US and international lead corrosion control field and pilot 
studies. Secondly, the basis for that target (other communities using Lake Huron source use the same 
dose) is not scientifically derived nor does it consider water quality and the current state of Flint's 
distribution system. We have reviewed the original Detroit corrosion study and have seen some of the 
LCR monitoring data, and besides the fact that it did not directiy pertain to this water source, few 
dosages were tested in the cited 1994 pipe loop study, and the higher dosage than the one 
implemented in the field currently was more effective. Based on the limited amount of data on the 
quality of Detroit water, what we know about the history of Detroit corrosion control, we think an 
orthophosphate residua! of 3 to 4 mg PQ4/L should be the minimum starting test target residual for pipe 
passivation, it is likely that, at least initially a higher dosage will be necessary to reach the far ends of 
the distribution system and sufficiently reduce lead solubility and release from ail lead sources. To allow 
flexibility, we feel the design of the chemical feed and storage systems should be able to consistently 
deliver a maximum dose of 5 to 6 mg P04/L, if substantial orthophosphate loss is observed, if the 
starting dose is set for the desired residual level of 3 to 4 mg/L as P04. We suggest that jar tests be 
performed in advance of orthophosphate addition to Detroit water to evaluate the impact of 
orthophosphate dose on turbidity that could result from interactions between orthophosphate and 
background Detroit water quality parameters (e.g., aluminum, calcium, etc.}. 

We want to stress that immediately shifting to Detroit water and adding orthophosphate will not 
necessarily translate to immediate improvements. Furthermore, this is a change, albeit a return to past 
conditions. Nonetheless, a period of system upset should be anticipated. The need for a communication 
strategy and a distribution system plan are critical. 



Lastly., we see no mention of a water qualify monitoring program. Two programs need to be put in place 
immediately (before return to Detroit water) to 1} identify lead sources, 2) assess treatment 
effectiveness against lead release from ail of the simultaneously operating mechanisms (solubility, 
particulate release, galvanic corrosion), and 3) assess orthophosphate levels and stability of water 
quality in the distribution system. 

There are multiple sources of lead in the Flint distribution system to the consumers' taps, such as: pipes; 
leaded brass; leaded solder; accumulations on old galvanized steel pipes; possibly accumulated on 
copper or some plastic pipes, it is critical that the fate of orthophosphate in the distribution system is 
understood, and how effective it is against each type of lead source, so dosing adjustment can be 
properly made. For this purpose, we recommend that a number of residences throughout Flint that 
meet the following plumbing criteria, be identified for an assessment of the contribution lead from the 
different potential service line and interior plumbing sources, through detailed mapping of plumbing 
materials, lengths, sizes, and location and type of inline devices and faucets using profile sampling. For 
confidence in interpretation, probably at least 5 sites from each of the configurations will be 
necessary. The configurations we would estimate to be most important (but should be changed or 
added to if local construction practice indicates it's necessary): Lead service line, galvanized steel 
Interior plumbing; lead service line, copper with leaded solder joints; lead service line, plastic interior 
plumbing. It is also possible that interior plumbing may differ from the material used for the customer- 
side service line segment. We would be glad to discuss the specifics of this sampling effort. 

For the purpose of assessing stability of water quality in the distribution system and to inform on 
orthophosphate residual adjustment, we suggest that 8 to 10 locations in the distribution system be 
selected to measure pH, alkalinity, orthophosphate, turbidity and iron on a weekly basis. These could be 
collected from TCR sampling locations, or other readiiy-aecessible buildings, should be located at a 
distribution of locations in the distribution system and should be collected after a flush sufficiently long 
to assure that "fresh" distribution system water is being measured. Research has shown that over time, 
orthophosphate can reduce disinfectant demand associated with corroding metallic distribution system 
materials. These measurements need to be performed in the field and can simply be done with a 
portable HACH test kit or spectrophotometer. 


A lead sampling plan needs to be in place to access the effectiveness of water change and treatment 
boost, ICR monitoring sites with confirmed lead service lines can be in the sampling pool. Sampling 
should consist of a 1 liter first draw sample (LCR sample without 5 minute pre-flush), followed by an 
additional flushed sample or two depending on profile sample results which is intended to capture 
major lead source(s). The specific details of this effort need to be worked out by the technical 
committee as soon as possible. We would gladly w'ork with Flint on establishing a water sampling 
program to identity and verify lead service line sites. The pian and initial sampling effort should be 
performed before the switch so that one baseline sample set is collected. 


Lastly, our strength does not fall under full-scale pump and chemical feed delivery systems. We would 
only say that the systems need to be scaled-up in size to accommodate our suggested dosing needs. 
Also, there is the some discussion about diverting water to the Dort reservoir and an associated 
orthophosphate feed system. We are not familiar with the reservoir but are wondering if it is an open 
reservoir? 



Of course this is a Sot of information to share and we would gladly be available to discuss the technical 
and scientific basis for our suggestions. 

Let us know if you have any questions and thanks again, 

Darren and Mike 

Darren A. Lytle, Ph.D., P.E. 

Branch Chief (Acting) 

U.S, Environmental Protection Agency 
26 West Martin Luther King Dr. 

Cincinnati, Ohio 45268 
Phone: (513) 569-7432 
Fax: (513) 487-2543 
email: iytle.darren@epa.gQv 



From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 21 , 201 5 2:32 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth (GOV); 

Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

Subject: 201 5-1 0-21 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 

CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 2015-10-21 Action Steps Week of October 19-23.pdf; 2015-10-21 Flint Drinking Water Action 

Plan Update.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 1 9-23, 201 5 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 19-23 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated as part of the 
After Action Plan (Action 
Step #4) 

2. 

Schedule Flint Water Treatment 
Plant tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Scheduled for 10/23/15 at 
1 1 :30 a.m. 

3. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 

1,300 samples (13 schools 
and 100 samples per school) 

4. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting to be 
scheduled for week of 
10/19/15 

5. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of N RE PA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

6. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 


7. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


8. 

$1 million for DEQ Laboratory billing 
code 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


9. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 



FQ1A EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 21, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 




































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

10. 

Develop letter to schools 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated into Action 
Step #13 

11. 

Finalize sampling protocol 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Revised draft sampling 
protocol shared with DLARA, 
DHHS, EPA, and Genesee 
County Health Department on 
1 0/1 9/1 5 for comment 

12. 

Confirm school sampling logistics 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


13. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

A meeting with the 10 
remaining schools is 
tentatively scheduled for the 
week of 1 0/26/1 5 

14. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 

15. 

ODWMA staff observe a DLARA 
plumbing assessment 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Initial plumbing assessment is 
scheduled for 1 0/23/1 5; 
sampling to occur on 
10/24/15 

16. 

Develop sample form and chain of 
custody document 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ Laboratory has created 
a tillable PDF form for use in 
the school sampling protocol 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 21 , 201 5 






























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

17. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Conference call with EPA 
held on 10/20/15 to discuss 
comments 

18. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Construction permit is in 
process 

19. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


20. 

Provide city of Flint updated 
monitoring schedule based on 
Detroit Water and Sewerage 
Department (DWSD)/Great Lakes 
Water Authority (GLWA) service 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


21. 

Contact city of Flint and Genesee 
County Health Department daily for 
DWSD connection status updates 

DEQ, Flint, and 
Genesee County 
Health Department 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Switch to DWSD completed 
on 1 0/1 6/1 5; city of Flint will 
let DEQ know if they run into 
any unforeseen issues 

22. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


23. 

Verify city of Flint distribution 
operations under DWSD/GLWA 
service 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 3 October 21 , 201 5 




























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

24. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


25. 

Provide DFIHS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


26. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHHS related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

4 October 21, 2015 















Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• Action Step #1 has been incorporated into the After Action Plan (Action Step #4). 

• It was determined that the information in Action Step #1 0 would be 
communicated better in person and has, therefore, been incorporated into Action 
Step #13. 

• DEQ staff has tentatively identify the week of October 26 to meet with 
representatives from the remaining 10 locations in the Flint Community Schools 
who were not present at the October 16 meeting at the Superintendent’s office. 

• DEQ staff has contacted DHHS to request a meeting regarding lead education 
materials for schools. 

• The first plumbing assessment has been scheduled for Friday, October 23. The 
subsequent sampling of the first facility has been scheduled for Saturday, 

October 24. This decision was made jointly among DEQ, DLARA, and DHHS in 
an effort to ensure that sampling staff could properly evaluate the sampling 
protocol without the added pressure of completing the sampling process before 
students arrived on-site. 

• The DEQ Laboratory has created a tillable PDF form for use in the school 
sampling protocol. This form was created to streamline the information gathering 
process. The form was submitted for review by staff in DEQ, DHHS, and 
DLARA, and comments were subsequently incorporated. The form is now 
complete and ready for use. 

• The corrosion control treatment plan (CCTP) and permit application were 
received late last Friday, October 1 6, and were reviewed. Our review comments 
were provided to Flint’s consultant [Lockwood, Andrews & Newnam, Inc. (LAN)]. 
The CCTP was forwarded to EPA on October 16, and their comments were 
received on October 19. A conference call was held on October 20 between our 
staff and Darren Lytle and Michael Schock of EPA to discuss the main comments 
(EPA’s and DEQ’s) to confirm that both agencies concur with the design and 
proposed corrosion control dosages. We are currently preparing a revised set of 
comments, based on our discussion with EPA. The revised comments will be 
sent to EPA to confirm concurrence before sending to LAN. 

• An Act 399 permit will be issued to the city of Flint to install corrosion control 
treatment following receipt of revised plans, specs, and - as needed - a permit 
application that addresses the revised review comments. 

• DEQ staff has contacted DHHS to schedule a meeting to discuss the 
development of childcare facility guidance. This guidance will be similar in nature 
to what is being done in schools but will be tailored to address the specific 




FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


concerns with younger children and the smaller plumbing infrastructure of typical 
childcare facilities. 

Additional Actions: 

• Standing meetings with the city of Flint have been scheduled for Fridays at 
10:00 a.m. These meetings have been scheduled through December 18. In 
addition, a tour of the Flint Water Treatment Plant has been scheduled for 
October 23. The DEQ be taking video footage of the tour, showing the 
coordinated efforts being taken by the city of Flint, DEQ, DHHS, and DLARA. 
Genesee County Health Department (GCHD) has been invited to the Friday 
meetings as well as the tour, and GCHD is in the process of determining if they 
can participate. 

• A meeting was held between staff from the DEQ, DLARA, and DHHS to discuss 
details regarding the flow and coordination of efforts for the school sampling 
protocol. It was mutually agreed that it was best to only do one school at first so 
that we can ensure that the process runs smoothly from partner to partner. The 
first plumbing evaluation will be done at Freeman Elementary School on Friday, 
October 23. Steve Busch of the DEQ will accompany staff from DLARA to 
answer questions they might have during their plumbing evaluations. The 
subsequent water sampling effort will take place the next day, on Saturday, 
October 24. It was agreed that taking the samples on Saturday would allow staff 
to be able to evaluate the sampling process without the added pressure of 
ensuring that the sampling was complete before students arrived at the building. 

• DEQ Director Dan Wyant, Jim Sygo, George Krisztian, and Karen Tommasulo 
held a conference call with Dr. Susan Hedman, EPA’s Regional Administrator, 
and other representatives from EPA to discuss the EPA’s formation of the Flint 
Safe Drinking Water Task Force. The purpose of the Task Force is to provide 
one-stop shopping for technical assistance for the optimization of corrosion 
controls for the switch from Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to the 
Karegnondi Water Authority. EPA requested a point of contact for the DEQ, and 
Director Wyant suggested Chief Deputy Director Jim Sygo. EPA agreed that this 
was an appropriate choice and requested a formal letter indicating Chief Deputy 
Director Sygo as the point of contact. 

• DHHS has indicated that the total water filter/pitcher distribution for the period of 
October 6 through October 20 was 9,373 units. 

Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


October 21 , 2015 





From: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 21 , 201 5 2:33 PM 

To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: 2015-10-21 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 

ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 2015-10-21 Action Steps Week of October 19-23.pdf; ATT00001.htm; 2015-10-21 Flint 

Drinking Water Action Plan Update.pdf; ATT00002.htm 


Can you put into one doc and send back? Thanks! 

Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" < WyantD@rnichigan.gov > 

Date: October 21, 2015 at 2:31:54 PM EDT 

To: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" < scQttal2@rnichigan.gov >, "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 

< muchmored (Smichigan.gov >. "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < Agenj@rnichigan.gov >, "Emmitt, Beth (GOV)" 
< emmittbgSmichigan.gov >. "Bedan, Morgan (GOV)" < BedanM@michigan.gov > 

Cc: "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" < WyantO@rnichigan.goy >. "Dickinson, Sarah (GOV)" 

< DickinsonS@michigan.gov > 

Subject: 2015-10-21 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT 
PRIVILEGED 

Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you 
have any questions, please let us know. 

1. Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 1 9-23, 201 5 

2 . Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


Thank you. 


Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 19-23 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated as part of the 
After Action Plan (Action 
Step #4) 

2. 

Schedule Flint Water Treatment 
Plant tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Scheduled for 10/23/15 at 
1 1 :30 a.m. 

3. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 

1,300 samples (13 schools 
and 100 samples per school) 

4. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting to be 
scheduled for week of 
10/19/15 

5. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of N RE PA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

6. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 


7. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


8. 

$1 million for DEQ Laboratory billing 
code 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


9. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 



FQ1A EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 21, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 




































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

10. 

Develop letter to schools 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated into Action 
Step #13 

11. 

Finalize sampling protocol 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Revised draft sampling 
protocol shared with DLARA, 
DHHS, EPA, and Genesee 
County Health Department on 
1 0/1 9/1 5 for comment 

12. 

Confirm school sampling logistics 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


13. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

A meeting with the 10 
remaining schools is 
tentatively scheduled for the 
week of 1 0/26/1 5 

14. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 

15. 

ODWMA staff observe a DLARA 
plumbing assessment 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Initial plumbing assessment is 
scheduled for 1 0/23/1 5; 
sampling to occur on 
10/24/15 

16. 

Develop sample form and chain of 
custody document 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ Laboratory has created 
a tillable PDF form for use in 
the school sampling protocol 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 21 , 201 5 






























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

17. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Conference call with EPA 
held on 10/20/15 to discuss 
comments 

18. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Construction permit is in 
process 

19. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


20. 

Provide city of Flint updated 
monitoring schedule based on 
Detroit Water and Sewerage 
Department (DWSD)/Great Lakes 
Water Authority (GLWA) service 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


21. 

Contact city of Flint and Genesee 
County Health Department daily for 
DWSD connection status updates 

DEQ, Flint, and 
Genesee County 
Health Department 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Switch to DWSD completed 
on 1 0/1 6/1 5; city of Flint will 
let DEQ know if they run into 
any unforeseen issues 

22. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


23. 

Verify city of Flint distribution 
operations under DWSD/GLWA 
service 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 3 October 21 , 201 5 




























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

24. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


25. 

Provide DFIHS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


26. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHHS related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

4 October 21, 2015 















Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• Action Step #1 has been incorporated into the After Action Plan (Action Step #4). 

• It was determined that the information in Action Step #1 0 would be 
communicated better in person and has, therefore, been incorporated into Action 
Step #13. 

• DEQ staff has tentatively identify the week of October 26 to meet with 
representatives from the remaining 10 locations in the Flint Community Schools 
who were not present at the October 16 meeting at the Superintendent’s office. 

• DEQ staff has contacted DHHS to request a meeting regarding lead education 
materials for schools. 

• The first plumbing assessment has been scheduled for Friday, October 23. The 
subsequent sampling of the first facility has been scheduled for Saturday, 

October 24. This decision was made jointly among DEQ, DLARA, and DHHS in 
an effort to ensure that sampling staff could properly evaluate the sampling 
protocol without the added pressure of completing the sampling process before 
students arrived on-site. 

• The DEQ Laboratory has created a tillable PDF form for use in the school 
sampling protocol. This form was created to streamline the information gathering 
process. The form was submitted for review by staff in DEQ, DHHS, and 
DLARA, and comments were subsequently incorporated. The form is now 
complete and ready for use. 

• The corrosion control treatment plan (CCTP) and permit application were 
received late last Friday, October 1 6, and were reviewed. Our review comments 
were provided to Flint’s consultant [Lockwood, Andrews & Newnam, Inc. (LAN)]. 
The CCTP was forwarded to EPA on October 16, and their comments were 
received on October 19. A conference call was held on October 20 between our 
staff and Darren Lytle and Michael Schock of EPA to discuss the main comments 
(EPA’s and DEQ’s) to confirm that both agencies concur with the design and 
proposed corrosion control dosages. We are currently preparing a revised set of 
comments, based on our discussion with EPA. The revised comments will be 
sent to EPA to confirm concurrence before sending to LAN. 

• An Act 399 permit will be issued to the city of Flint to install corrosion control 
treatment following receipt of revised plans, specs, and - as needed - a permit 
application that addresses the revised review comments. 

• DEQ staff has contacted DHHS to schedule a meeting to discuss the 
development of childcare facility guidance. This guidance will be similar in nature 
to what is being done in schools but will be tailored to address the specific 




FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


concerns with younger children and the smaller plumbing infrastructure of typical 
childcare facilities. 

Additional Actions: 

• Standing meetings with the city of Flint have been scheduled for Fridays at 
10:00 a.m. These meetings have been scheduled through December 18. In 
addition, a tour of the Flint Water Treatment Plant has been scheduled for 
October 23. The DEQ be taking video footage of the tour, showing the 
coordinated efforts being taken by the city of Flint, DEQ, DHHS, and DLARA. 
Genesee County Health Department (GCHD) has been invited to the Friday 
meetings as well as the tour, and GCHD is in the process of determining if they 
can participate. 

• A meeting was held between staff from the DEQ, DLARA, and DHHS to discuss 
details regarding the flow and coordination of efforts for the school sampling 
protocol. It was mutually agreed that it was best to only do one school at first so 
that we can ensure that the process runs smoothly from partner to partner. The 
first plumbing evaluation will be done at Freeman Elementary School on Friday, 
October 23. Steve Busch of the DEQ will accompany staff from DLARA to 
answer questions they might have during their plumbing evaluations. The 
subsequent water sampling effort will take place the next day, on Saturday, 
October 24. It was agreed that taking the samples on Saturday would allow staff 
to be able to evaluate the sampling process without the added pressure of 
ensuring that the sampling was complete before students arrived at the building. 

• DEQ Director Dan Wyant, Jim Sygo, George Krisztian, and Karen Tommasulo 
held a conference call with Dr. Susan Hedman, EPA’s Regional Administrator, 
and other representatives from EPA to discuss the EPA’s formation of the Flint 
Safe Drinking Water Task Force. The purpose of the Task Force is to provide 
one-stop shopping for technical assistance for the optimization of corrosion 
controls for the switch from Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to the 
Karegnondi Water Authority. EPA requested a point of contact for the DEQ, and 
Director Wyant suggested Chief Deputy Director Jim Sygo. EPA agreed that this 
was an appropriate choice and requested a formal letter indicating Chief Deputy 
Director Sygo as the point of contact. 

• DHHS has indicated that the total water filter/pitcher distribution for the period of 
October 6 through October 20 was 9,373 units. 

Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


October 21 , 2015 





From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Thursday, October 22, 2015 12:39 PM 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 
(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

2015-10-22 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 
CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

2015-10-22 Action Steps Week of October 19-23.pdf; 2015-10-22 Flint Drinking 
Water Action Plan Update.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 1 9-23, 201 5 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 19-23 


Step No. 

Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated as part of the 
After Action Plan (Action 
Step #4) 

2. 

Schedule Flint Water Treatment 
Plant tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Scheduled for 10/23/15 at 
1 1 :30 a.m. 

3. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 

1,300 samples (13 schools 
and 100 samples per school) 

4. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting scheduled for 
10/22/15 

5. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of N RE PA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

6. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 

Panel created and press 
release issued on 10/21/15 

7. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


8. 

$1 million for DEQ Laboratory billing 
code 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 

Billing codes created on 
10/21/15 

9. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 22, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 


























Step No. 

Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

10. 

Develop letter to schools 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated into Action 
Step #13 

11. 

Finalize sampling protocol 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Comments received from 
EPA’s Flint Safe Drinking 
Water Task Force (Task 
Force); DEQ staff continuing 
to finalize protocol 

12. 

Confirm school sampling logistics 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Logistics have been finalized 
for the initial sampling 
scheduled for 1 0/24/1 5 

13. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

A meeting with the 10 
remaining schools is 
tentatively scheduled for the 
week of 1 0/26/1 5 

14. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 

15. 

ODWMA staff observe a DLARA 
plumbing assessment 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Initial plumbing assessment is 
scheduled for 1 0/23/1 5; 
sampling to occur on 
10/24/15 

16. 

Develop sample form and chain of 
custody document 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ Laboratory has created 
a tillable PDF form for use in 
the school sampling protocol 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 22, 201 5 
















Step No. 

Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

17. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Conference call with EPA 
held on 10/20/15 to discuss 
comments 

18. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Construction permit is in 
process 

19. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ staff is reviewing and 
seeking clarification on 
comments received from 
EPA’s Task Force 

20. 

Provide city of Flint updated 
monitoring schedule based on 
Detroit Water and Sewerage 
Department (DWSD)/Great Lakes 
Water Authority (GLWA) service 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


21. 

Contact city of Flint and Genesee 
County Health Department daily for 
DWSD connection status updates 

DEQ, Flint, and 
Genesee County 
Health Department 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Switch to DWSD completed 
on 1 0/1 6/1 5; city of Flint will 
let DEQ know if they run into 
any unforeseen issues 

22. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Monitoring letter expected to 
be mailed on 10/22/15 

23. 

Verify city of Flint distribution 
operations under DWSD/GLWA 
service 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 3 October 22, 201 5 
















Step No. 

Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

24. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


25. 

Provide DHHS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


26. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHHS related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

4 October 22, 2015 













Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• The initial meeting for the internal After Action Plan is scheduled for October 22. 
The purpose of the meeting is to define the scope of the internal review, create a 
detailed time line, connect all communications together to determine where 
communications could have been improved, and create a list of lessons learned 
and action steps moving forward. 

• Madhu Anderson has provided information for the creation of an external After 
Action Review Panel. The Panel members have been selected, and a press 
release was issued by the Governor’s office on October 21 . 

• The DEQ Laboratory, working in conjunction with MDOT’s Accounting Services 
Division, has created the necessary billing codes to allow payment for the lead 
and copper samples from the city of Flint to be processed. 

• The EPA’s Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force (Task Force) has provided 
comments to staff in the Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance 
(ODWMA) on the sampling protocol. These comments are being reviewed, and 
ODWMA staff is continuing to finalize the protocol. 

• The logistics for the initial plumbing evaluation and subsequent water sampling 
have been finalized among staff from DEQ, DLARA, and DHHS. The plumbing 
inspection is scheduled for Friday, October 23, and the water samples will be 
taken on Saturday, October 24. 

• DEQ staff is responding to comments on the corrosion control proposal made by 
the EPA’s Task Force. DEQ staff is following up on questions raised during the 
October 20 conference call. 

• A monitoring schedule letter is expected to be mailed on October 22. The 
monitoring schedule addresses the change back to a customer supply of the 
Great Lakes Water Authority. A final copy of the letter will be attached to 
tomorrow’s update. 

Additional Actions: 

• At the request of Representative Sheldon Neeley, George Krisztian contacted 
Carlita Earl, Principal of the Eagle’s Nest Academy. Ms. Earl has formally 
requested that Eagle’s Nest Academy receive a plumbing evaluation and water 
sampling as outlined in the newly-developed school assessment protocol. 

Ms. Earl was informed that she would be added to the list of schools being 
evaluated and that the original 13 Flint Community Schools buildings would be 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


evaluated first and then the DEQ/DLARA/DHHS would expand the evaluation 
process to charter schools, parochial schools, and other childcare facilities. 

Ms. Earl was informed that since the Eagle’s Nest Academy serves children in 
grades K-4 that they would be placed at the top of the list once the evaluations of 
the original 13 buildings are complete. 

• Director Dan Wyant, Chief Deputy Director Jim Sygo, and George Krisztian met 
with a group of pastors and citizens who came to Constitution Hall to voice their 
concerns regarding the water in Flint. The discussion lasted for approximately 
one hour, and the topics included a history of events, questions regarding how 
decisions were made, and the plan moving forward. The group indicated that 
they had read a great deal in the media and were interested in finding out what 
DEQ’s perspective of the situation was. The questions were tough, but the 
conversation was very respectful. The group was informed that an independent 
group external to the DEQ would be conducting an After Action Review, and this 
information seemed to be well-received. 

• Shelly Edgerton of DLARA spoke to Eric Swanson of DTMB, who is going to call 
Howard Croft, Public Works Director, city of Flint, about the GIS program that the 
city of Flint is trying to run. Eric will follow up with Shelly after the conversation. 

In addition, DLARA will be meeting again with the city of Flint. 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


'ctober 22, 2015 




From: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 1:25 PM 

To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: 2015-10-22 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 

ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 2015-10-22 Action Steps Week of October 19-23.pdf; ATT00001.htm; 2015-10-22 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update.pdf; ATT00002.htm 


Can you frow deez into one and send to me 
Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" < W va nt S @ m i ch i ga n . gov > 

Date: October 22, 2015 at 12:39:13 PM EDT 

To: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" < scottal2@michigan.goy >. "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 
< muchmoreri@rnichigan.gov >. "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < Ageni@micbigan,gov >, "Emmitt, Beth (GOV)" 
< emmittb@michigan.gov >, "Bedan, Morgan (GOV)" < BedariM@michigan.gov > 

Cc: "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" < WyantD@michiaan.gov >, "Dickinson, Sarah (GOV)" 

< DickinsonS@michigan.gov > 

Subject: 2015-10-22 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT 
PRIVILEGED 

Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you 
have any questions, please let us know. 

1. Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 1 9-23, 201 5 

2 . Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 19-23 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated as part of the 
After Action Plan (Action 
Step #4) 

2. 

Schedule Flint Water Treatment 
Plant tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Scheduled for 10/23/15 at 
1 1 :30 a.m. 

3. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 

1,300 samples (13 schools 
and 100 samples per school) 

4. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting scheduled for 
10/22/15 

5. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of N RE PA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

6. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 

Panel created and press 
release issued on 10/21/15 

7. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


8. 

$1 million for DEQ Laboratory billing 
code 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 

Billing codes created on 
10/21/15 

9. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 



FQIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 22, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 




































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

10. 

Develop letter to schools 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated into Action 
Step #13 

11. 

Finalize sampling protocol 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Comments received from 
EPA’s Flint Safe Drinking 
Water Task Force (Task 
Force); DEQ staff continuing 
to finalize protocol 

12. 

Confirm school sampling logistics 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Logistics have been finalized 
for the initial sampling 
scheduled for 1 0/24/1 5 

13. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

A meeting with the 10 
remaining schools is 
tentatively scheduled for the 
week of 1 0/26/1 5 

14. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 

15. 

ODWMA staff observe a DLARA 
plumbing assessment 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Initial plumbing assessment is 
scheduled for 1 0/23/1 5; 
sampling to occur on 
10/24/15 

16. 

Develop sample form and chain of 
custody document 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ Laboratory has created 
a tillable PDF form for use in 
the school sampling protocol 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 22, 201 5 





























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

17. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Conference call with EPA 
held on 10/20/15 to discuss 
comments 

18. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Construction permit is in 
process 

19. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ staff is reviewing and 
seeking clarification on 
comments received from 
EPA’s Task Force 

20. 

Provide city of Flint updated 
monitoring schedule based on 
Detroit Water and Sewerage 
Department (DWSD)/Great Lakes 
Water Authority (GLWA) service 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


21. 

Contact city of Flint and Genesee 
County Health Department daily for 
DWSD connection status updates 

DEQ, Flint, and 
Genesee County 
Health Department 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Switch to DWSD completed 
on 1 0/1 6/1 5; city of Flint will 
let DEQ know if they run into 
any unforeseen issues 

22. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Monitoring letter expected to 
be mailed on 10/22/15 

23. 

Verify city of Flint distribution 
operations under DWSD/GLWA 
service 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 3 October 22, 201 5 




























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

24. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


25. 

Provide DFIHS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


26. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHHS related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

4 October 22, 2015 















Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• The initial meeting for the internal After Action Plan is scheduled for October 22. 
The purpose of the meeting is to define the scope of the internal review, create a 
detailed time line, connect all communications together to determine where 
communications could have been improved, and create a list of lessons learned 
and action steps moving forward. 

• Madhu Anderson has provided information for the creation of an external After 
Action Review Panel. The Panel members have been selected, and a press 
release was issued by the Governor’s office on October 21 . 

• The DEQ Laboratory, working in conjunction with MDOT’s Accounting Services 
Division, has created the necessary billing codes to allow payment for the lead 
and copper samples from the city of Flint to be processed. 

• The EPA’s Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force (Task Force) has provided 
comments to staff in the Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance 
(ODWMA) on the sampling protocol. These comments are being reviewed, and 
ODWMA staff is continuing to finalize the protocol. 

• The logistics for the initial plumbing evaluation and subsequent water sampling 
have been finalized among staff from DEQ, DLARA, and DHHS. The plumbing 
inspection is scheduled for Friday, October 23, and the water samples will be 
taken on Saturday, October 24. 

• DEQ staff is responding to comments on the corrosion control proposal made by 
the EPA’s Task Force. DEQ staff is following up on questions raised during the 
October 20 conference call. 

• A monitoring schedule letter is expected to be mailed on October 22. The 
monitoring schedule addresses the change back to a customer supply of the 
Great Lakes Water Authority. A final copy of the letter will be attached to 
tomorrow’s update. 

Additional Actions: 

• At the request of Representative Sheldon Neeley, George Krisztian contacted 
Carlita Earl, Principal of the Eagle’s Nest Academy. Ms. Earl has formally 
requested that Eagle’s Nest Academy receive a plumbing evaluation and water 
sampling as outlined in the newly-developed school assessment protocol. 

Ms. Earl was informed that she would be added to the list of schools being 
evaluated and that the original 13 Flint Community Schools buildings would be 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


evaluated first and then the DEQ/DLARA/DHHS would expand the evaluation 
process to charter schools, parochial schools, and other childcare facilities. 

Ms. Earl was informed that since the Eagle’s Nest Academy serves children in 
grades K-4 that they would be placed at the top of the list once the evaluations of 
the original 13 buildings are complete. 

• Director Dan Wyant, Chief Deputy Director Jim Sygo, and George Krisztian met 
with a group of pastors and citizens who came to Constitution Hall to voice their 
concerns regarding the water in Flint. The discussion lasted for approximately 
one hour, and the topics included a history of events, questions regarding how 
decisions were made, and the plan moving forward. The group indicated that 
they had read a great deal in the media and were interested in finding out what 
DEQ’s perspective of the situation was. The questions were tough, but the 
conversation was very respectful. The group was informed that an independent 
group external to the DEQ would be conducting an After Action Review, and this 
information seemed to be well-received. 

• Shelly Edgerton of DLARA spoke to Eric Swanson of DTMB, who is going to call 
Howard Croft, Public Works Director, city of Flint, about the GIS program that the 
city of Flint is trying to run. Eric will follow up with Shelly after the conversation. 

In addition, DLARA will be meeting again with the city of Flint. 


Prepared by: 


George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 



'ctober 22, 2015 



From: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: 

Thursday, October 22, 2015 4:41 PM 

To: 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Scott, Allison (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth (GOV); 
Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: 

Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

Subject: 

RE: 2015-10-22 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 
ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 


Are we sharing any of this with Ananich and Neely? 


From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 12:39 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV) < scott3l2@michigan.gov >; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < jTiuchmored@michigan.gov >; Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV) < Agenj@miehigan.gov >; Emmitt, Beth (GOV) < emmittb@michigan.gov >; Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 
< Bed3nM@michigan.gQv > 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) < WyantD@michig3n.gov >; Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DickinsonS@michig3n.gov > 

Subject: 2015-10-22 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 1 9-23, 201 5 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Friday, October 23, 2015 12:07 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 

(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. 

(DHHS) 

Subject: 2015-10-23 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 

CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 2015-10-23 Action Steps Week of October 19-23.pdf; 2015-10-23 Flint Drinking 

Water Action Plan Update.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 1 9-23, 201 5 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 

P.S. We are adding Shelly Edgerton, DLARA and Linda Dykema, DHHS as a cc to these daily e-mail 
communications in the future. 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 19-23 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated as part of the 
After Action Plan (Action 
Step #4) 

2. 

Schedule Flint Water Treatment 
Plant tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Scheduled for 10/23/15 at 
1 1 :30 a.m. 

3. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 

1,300 samples (13 schools 
and 100 samples per school) 

4. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting held 10/22/15 

5. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of NREPA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

6. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 

Panel created and press 
release issued on 10/21/15 

7. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


8. 

$1 million for DEQ Laboratory billing 
code 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 

Billing codes created on 
10/21/15 

9. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 



FQIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 23, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 


































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

10. 

Develop letter to schools 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated into Action 
Step #13 

11. 

Finalize sampling protocol 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Held conference call on 
10/22/15 with EPA’s Flint 
Safe Drinking Water Task 
Force to clarify questions on 
sampling protocol 

12. 

Confirm school sampling logistics 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Logistics have been finalized 
for the initial sampling 
scheduled for 1 0/24/1 5 

13. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

A meeting with the 10 
remaining schools is 
tentatively scheduled for the 
week of 1 0/26/1 5 

14. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 

15. 

ODWMA staff observe a DLARA 
plumbing assessment 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Initial plumbing assessment is 
scheduled for 1 0/23/1 5; 
sampling to occur on 
10/24/15 

16. 

Develop sample form and chain of 
custody document 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ Laboratory has created 
a tillable PDF form for use in 
the school sampling protocol 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 23, 201 5 





























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

17. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Summary of Flint’s corrosion 
control plan submitted to EPA 

18. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Construction permit is in 
process; proper phosphate 
dosages confirmed, based on 
incoming residual to Flint 

19. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


20. 

Provide city of Flint updated 
monitoring schedule based on 
Detroit Water and Sewerage 
Department (DWSD)/Great Lakes 
Water Authority (GLWA) service 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Updated monitoring schedule 
has been completed and 
signed 

21. 

Contact city of Flint and Genesee 
County Health Department daily for 
DWSD connection status updates 

DEQ, Flint, and 
Genesee County 
Health Department 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Switch to DWSD completed 
on 1 0/1 6/1 5; city of Flint will 
let DEQ know if they run into 
any unforeseen issues 

22. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

E-mail sent to Genesee 
County regarding concerns 
over soil erosion control 
measures 

23. 

Verify city of Flint distribution 
operations under DWSD/GLWA 
service 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 3 October 23, 201 5 




























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

24. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


25. 

Provide DFIHS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


26. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHHS related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

4 October 23, 2015 















Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• The initial After Action Plan meeting was held on October 22. Topics covered 
were: 

o The discussion of the roles of each team member 
o The scope of the After Action Plan 

o The time frame in which the After Action Plan is to be completed 
The main components of the After Action Plan are: 

o An After Action Review Summary time line that details critical events in 
chronological order, asking key questions, and providing explanations for 
actions taken 

o Implementation of the Governor’s 10-point Action Plan 
o An evaluation of if DEQ made mistakes and, if so, what they were 

o An evaluation of lessons learned, defining what we can do better/differently 

in the future 

• Participated on an October 22 conference call with the EPA’s Flint Safe Drinking 
Water Task Force to discuss proposed sampling protocol and the comments 
received from EPA. Agreed to reconvene a call next week to discuss how the 
pilot sampling effort goes, what went well, what might need to be adjusted, etc. 

• A summary of our discussion with EPA regarding Flint’s corrosion control plan 
was provided to Darren Lytle and Michael Schock of EPA. The summary 
included confirmation of the actual phosphate dosage from the Detroit Lake 
Huron Water Treatment Plant. 

• Proper dosages are now confirmed, based on incoming phosphate residual at 
Flint. A product cut-sheet to confirm NSF approval and maximum dose is to be 
provided shortly. Flint’s consultant (Lockwood, Andrews & Newnam, Inc.) will 
also confirm proper sizing of the feed pumps. Anticipate receiving this 
information on October 23, which will facilitate issuance of the Act 399 permit. 

• An updated monitoring schedule is completed and signed. The schedule will be 
mailed to the city of Flint on October 23. A copy of the updated monitoring 
schedule is attached. 

• An e-mail was sent to John O’Brien of Genesee County informing him of our 
concern over improper soil erosion control measures at the pipeline job site and 
what corrective measures were being taken to avoid a potential halt of 
construction by the Lapeer County Road Commission. Genesee County has not 
responded thus far. 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


Additional Actions: 

• A conference call was held among representatives from DEQ/DLARA/DHHS to 
further discuss ways to ensure that the efforts of all three agencies were 
coordinated. It was determined that weekly calls providing updates to the group 
as a whole would be beneficial. DEQ also agreed to copy DLARA and DHHS on 
their daily update report to the Governor’s office. 

• Flint Action Plan Coordinator George Krisztian contacted Flint Community 
Schools Superintendent Bilal Tawwab to obtain permission to allow the Detroit 
Free Press to take footage of the water sampling process to be conducted at 
Freeman Elementary School on Saturday, October 24. Superintendent Tawwab 
gave his permission, stating that it would not be an issue since there would not 
be any students present. 

• DLARA completed additional review of documents at the Flint repository to assist 
with the sequencing at the schools. 

• Flint is able to provide DLARA plumbing inspectors with on-site workspace; 
additional documentation gives greater guidance on locations for plumbing 
fixtures. 

• DLARA received confirmation from DEQ that bottles and necessary equipment 
will be available for sampling start on Saturday, October 24. 

Attachment (Updated Monitoring Schedule) 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


'ctober 23, 2015 



RICK SNYDER 

GOVERNOR 


State of Michigan 

DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 

Lansing District Office 

DAN WYANT 

DIRECTOR 



October 22, 2015 


Mr. Brent Wright 

City Of Flint -D.P.W WSSN: 02310 

Flint Water Plant 

4500 North Dort Highway 

Flint, Michigan 48505 

Dear Mr. Wright: 

SUBJECT: Revised Drinking Water Monitoring Schedule - 2015 
Monthly Operation Reports 
Siting Plans and Record Keeping 

Monitoring Schedule: 

Enclosed is your revised Drinking Water Monitoring Schedule for remainder of calendar 
year 201 5 outlining the minimum requirements for your public water supply. Your 
schedule has been revised based on the City’s change in source of its drinking water 
from the treatment of the Flint River utilizing the City’s Water Treatment Plant to the 
Great Lakes Water Authority/Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. Collect samples 
early in the monitoring period of the year indicated on the schedule. If you use a private 
laboratory you are required to report the results to us within the first ten days of the 
month following the month that you received the results. To receive credit for 
monitoring, the "WSSN” (water supply serial number), the "Site Code," and "County" 
must appear on the sample result. Bottles will NOT be mailed automatically. If you use 
the Department of Environmental Quality Laboratory, you can order bottles by calling 
517-335-8184. Be certain of the United States Environmental Protection Agency 
sampling and analysis method requirements for hold times. 

Monthly Operation Report (MOR) Requirements: 

The City shall submit MORs as required under Administrative Rule 1502 (R325.11502). 
Please note required coliform bacteria monitoring results and associated chlorine 
residual monitoring shall be submitted to the department within the first 10 days 
following the end of the required monthly monitoring period. In addition, monthly 
operation reports shall be submitted to the department during the month following the 
month for which the monthly operation report was prepared. 


CONSTITUTION HALL * 525 WEST ALLEGAN STREET • P.O. BOX 30242 • LANSING, MICHIGAN 48909-7742 

www.michigan.gov/deq • (517) 284-6651 



Mr. Brent Wright 


2 


October 22,2015 


Disinfection By-Product Sample Siting Plans: 

The City of Flint shall continue routine standard monitoring of disinfection by-products, 
according to your Disinfection & Disinfectants By-Product (DDBP) plan which identifies 
8 sites for routine quarterly monitoring. 

Lead and Copper Monitoring Requirements and Site Sample Pool 

Please note distribution system monitoring for water quality parameters (WQPs) 
continues at the expanded set of 25 sites per quarter. Lead and copper monitoring in 
accordance with the requirements of Administrative Rule 710a (R325,10710a) is being 
required for the 6 month period between January 1, 2016 and June 30, 2016. The City 
must ensure its sample site pool is large enough to collect the number of lead and 
copper tap samples required. All sites from which first draw samples are collected shall 
be selected from the pool of targeted sampling sites. 

The City shall also conduct additional operational monitoring to demonstrate the 
effectiveness of corrosion control treatment. 


Record Keeping: 


The City shall maintain all monitoring records in accordance with all applicable 
requirements under the Administrative Rules including Rule 720a (R325. 10720a), 

Ruie 1506 (R325.1 1506), and Rule 1507 (R325.11507) 

The Michigan Safe Drinking Water Act requires certain reports to be submitted to this 
office each year. Please remember that cross connection reports and annual pumpage 
reports are due by March 31 , and the Consumer Confidence Report is due by July 1 . 


Also enclosed is the document “2015 Monitoring and Reporting Requirements.” This 
provides additional details about monitoring and reporting requirements. If you have 
any questions, please contact us using the information below. 


/ 











Michael F. Prysby, P.E., District Engineer 
Lansing District Office 
Office of Drinking Water and 
Municipal Assistance 
517-290-8817 



Lansing District Office 
Office of Drinking Water and 
Municipal Assistance 
517-284-6644 


Enclosure 

cc/encl: Mr. Robert Bisnick, City Of Flint 

Genesee County Health Department 



2015 Monitoring Schedule 

FLINT, CITY OF wssn: 02310 

Collect samples early in the monitoring period. This schedule reflects your expected routine monitoring and is subject to change. To 
receive credit for monitoring, include the WSSN, Site Code, and County on your request for analysis form. Collect Bacteriological and 
Automated Partial Chemistry samples close to the shipping time and send overnight delivery. Send all sample results to your 
Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) district office unless you use the DEQ laboratory. Test codes, sample units, and costs are 
listed to help you complete the DEQ laboratory form. Prices are subject to change without notice. The DEQ laboratory is closed on state 
holidays. 

Location: Distribution System 


Collect Samples # Samples/ Site Unit Test 

Sample Type According to the ... Frequency Collect Code Fee Number Code 


Bacteriological - conforms 

TCR Sampling 
Site Plan 

1 00/Monthly 

Monthly 

DIST 

$16.00 

30 

BPTC 

Chlorine Residual 

DBP Monitoring Plan 

If serving chlorinated water, measure the residual disinfectant level at the same point and at 
the same time as the bacteriological sample and report the average to the DEQ, 

Total Trihalomethanes 

DBP Monitoring Plan 

8/3 months 

During 

February, 

May, 

August and 
November 
2015 

See DBP 
Monitoring Plan 

$65.00 

36VO 

CXTM 

Haloacetic Acids 

8/3 months 

During 

February, 

May, 

August and 
November 
2015 

See DBP 
Monitoring Plan 

$130.00 

36HA 

CXHA 

Water Quality Parameters 

Representative Sites 

25/Quarterly 

Quarterly 

DiST 

Various 

Various 


Lead Copper for 
Corrosion Control 

Lead and Copper 
Sampling Pool 

60/6 months 

Between 1/1 
and 

6/30/2016 

DIST 

$26.00 

36CC 



GENESEE 


10/22/2015 





































Community Water Supply 
2015 Monitoring and Reporting Requirements 

Please Monitor Early: Collect samples early in the monitoring period (month, quarter, 
year) of the year indicated on the schedule. Bacteriological and partial chemistry 
samples should be collected close to the shipping time and sent overnight delivery to 
assure sample holding times are not exceeded (30 and 48 hour hold times respectively). 
We also recommend avoiding mailing bacteriological samples immediately preceding or 
following a holiday because samples tend to exceed the 30 hour hold time. When this 
occurs, a repeat sample must be collected as soon as possible upon notification. 

If you use a private laboratory please report the results to us within the first ten days of 
the month following the month that you received the results. A list of certified 
laboratories is available on request. If samples are not collected as indicated on your 
monitoring schedule, you will incur a monitoring violation and possibly a fine. For 
information on the fines policy, visit http://michigan.gov/deqwater. Click on Drinking 
Water, Community Water Supply, and Administrative Fines (under Laws and Rules). 


To receive credit for monitoring, you must include the "WSSN” (water supply serial 
number), the "Site Code," and the "County" when you submit samples for analysis. 
Site codes are listed on your monitoring schedule. 


Special Instructions If You Use The DEQ Laboratory: Bottles will NOT be mailed 
automatically. To order bottles, call the DEQ Laboratory at 517-335-8184 or download 
the form EQP 2301 Requisition for Water Sample Units from www.michigan.gov/deq. 
Click on Key Topics, Laboratory Services, Drinking Water, Obtaining The Necessary 
Sampling Units, and 'test list’. Please note that the DEQ laboratory is closed on most 
state holidays. The DEQ laboratory prices are subject to change without notice. 

Special Instructions For Automated Partial Chemistry, VOC and TTHM Samples : These 
sample bottles must be cooled and preserved during shipment to the laboratory. If you 
use the DEQ laboratory, you will receive the ice pack, acid dropper (if necessary) and 
small cooler when you request the bottles. Samples must be preserved correctly to be 
used for compliance purposes. To avoid resampling follow instructions contained with 
the sample bottle, if you would like more information, contact the DEQ lab, at 
517-335-8184, or contact this office, 

Cyanide : Previously, supplies that chlorinated the water were waived from monitoring 
for cyanide. The U.S. EPA now requires all supplies to sample the entry point for 
cyanide. 

UCMR3 Monitoring : You may have monitoring requirements in 2015 under the third 
Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule (UCMR3). The U.S. EPA will contact you 
directly if your water supply is required to monitor in 2015. A list of laboratories certified 
to analyze the samples collected for UCMR3 is available at 

http://water.epa.gov/lawsregs/rulesregs/sdwa/ucmr/ucmr3/upload/iablist.pdf. Contact 
the U.S. EPA with questions. 


Page 1 of 2 







Reminder if Lead and Copper Monitoring Due This Year : Provide individual lead tap 
results to people who receive water from sites that you sampled, even if lead was not 
detected, within 30 days of learning the results. Send us a certification that you met all 
the delivery requirements along with a sample copy of the customer notice within 3 
months after the end of the monitoring period. Water supplies that failed to distribute the 
Consumer Notice of Lead Results must include the following statement in their CCR, 
"During the year, we failed to provide lead results to persons served at the sites that 
were tested as required by the Lead and Copper Rule.” To download the Lead and 
Copper Report and Consumer Notice of Lead Result Certificate in Microsoft Word or 
PDF format, visit www.michigan.gov/deqwater. Click on Drinking Water, Community 
Water Supply, and Reporting Forms (under Manuals, Forms & Brochures). 

Annual Reports : These reports are due to this office each year. 

• The Cross Connection Report, due by March 31 , describes the status of your 
local cross connection control program. Manufactured housing communities are 
exempt from this requirements until 2016. 

Each year, water supplies must submit this report, even if a formal program has 
not been implemented. If cross connections do not exist in your water system, 
indicate so on the report. Download the Cross Connection Report form from 
http://michigan.gov/deqwater. Click on Drinking Water, Community Water 
Supply, Reporting Forms (under Manuals, Forms & Brochures). Instructions are 
included with the form. 

• The Annual Pumpage/Usage Report, due by March 31 , is required of water 
supplies that do not submit monthly operation reports. 

This summary of water pumpage and water use must be submitted by each 
water supply that does not submit a monthly operation report. To manage our 
natural resources, pumpage data are compiled to determine water use demands 
in Michigan. Download the Annua! Pumpage/Usage Report form from 
http://michigan.gov/deqwater. Click on Drinking Water, Community Water 
Supply, Reporting Forms (under Manuals, Forms & Brochures). Please be sure 
to indicate the appropriate units on the report (e g. million gallons or gallons). 

• The Consumer Confidence Report, due by July 1 to your customers, to your 
local health department and to this office, describes the quality of the water and 
characterizes the risks, if any, from exposure to contaminants detected.. 

Electronic delivery methods may be used to distribute the CCR to bill-paying 
customers, provided the method is direct. A paper copy must be delivered to bill- 
paying customers who request it or known to be unable to receive the CCR 
electronically. For more information on e-delivery, visit 
www.michigan.gov/deqwater. Click on Drinking Water, Community Water 
Supply, Consumer Confidence Report Rule (under Laws and Rules). 


Page 2 of 2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 


Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Monday, October 26, 2015 2:26 PM 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 
(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. 

(DHHS) 

Subject: 2015-10-26 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 

CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 2015-10-26 Action Steps Week of October 19-23.pdf; 2015-10-26 Flint Drinking 

Water Action Plan Update.pdf; MDHHS 10-22-15_Daily Activity Summary.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 1 9-23, 201 5 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

3. MDHHS’s 1 0-22-1 5 Daily Activity Summary 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 19-23 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated as part of the 
After Action Plan (Action 
Step #4) 

2. 

Schedule Flint Water Treatment 
Plant tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Scheduled for 10/23/15 at 
1 1 :30 a.m. 

3. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 

1,300 samples (13 schools 
and 100 samples per school) 

4. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting held 10/22/15 

5. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of NREPA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

6. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 

Panel created and press 
release issued on 10/21/15 

7. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


8. 

$1 million for DEQ Laboratory billing 
code 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 

Billing codes created on 
10/21/15 

9. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 



FQIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 26, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 


































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

10. 

Develop letter to schools 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated into Action 
Step #13 

11. 

Finalize sampling protocol 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Sampling protocol was 
revised to include comments 
by EPA 

12. 

Confirm school sampling logistics 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Logistics have been finalized 
for the initial sampling 
scheduled for 1 0/24/1 5 

13. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

A meeting with the 10 
remaining schools is 
tentatively scheduled for the 
week of 1 0/26/1 5 

14. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 

15. 

ODWMA staff observe a DLARA 
plumbing assessment 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ staff observed the 
DLARA plumbing assessment 
of Freeman Elementary 
School on 1 0/23/1 5 

16. 

Develop sample form and chain of 
custody document 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ Laboratory has created 
a tillable PDF form for use in 
the school sampling protocol 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 26, 201 5 



























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

17. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Summary of Flint’s corrosion 
control plan submitted to EPA 

18. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Additional discussions are in 
progress with city of Flint 

19. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Comments by DEQ to city of 
Flint have been provided 

20. 

Provide city of Flint updated 
monitoring schedule based on 
Detroit Water and Sewerage 
Department (DWSD)/Great Lakes 
Water Authority (GLWA) service 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Updated monitoring schedule 
has been completed and 
signed 

21. 

Contact city of Flint and Genesee 
County Health Department daily for 
DWSD connection status updates 

DEQ, Flint, and 
Genesee County 
Health Department 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Switch to DWSD completed 
on 1 0/1 6/1 5; city of Flint will 
let DEQ know if they run into 
any unforeseen issues 

22. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Issues regarding soil erosion 
controls during construction 
are being addressed 

23. 

Verify city of Flint distribution 
operations under DWSD/GLWA 
service 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

The switch back to Detroit 
water has been smooth so far 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 3 October 26, 201 5 




























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

24. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


25. 

Provide DFIHS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


26. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHHS related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

4 October 26, 2015 















Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• The sampling protocol was revised to address comments received on October 22 
from EPA’s Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force. 

• Staff assisted DLARA in conducting a plumbing assessment at Freeman 
Elementary School. Actions were taken to prepare for sampling to be conducted 
on Saturday, October 24. 

• The information requested by the DEQ was not received on October 23 from 
Flint’s consultant, Lockwood, Andrews & Newnam, Inc. (LAN); thus, the 
construction permit for phosphate equipment was not issued. DEQ staff 
discussed with Flint Water Treatment Plant operator Brent Wright and Utilities 
Superintendent Michael Glascow. Brent confirmed that he needs to provide 
some of the information regarding the phosphate product to LAN. 

• DEQ staff discussed with Michael Glascow and Brent Wright the need for 
quarterly test runs and monthly operation reporting details while the Flint Water 
Treatment Plant is in standby mode. Also included the need to report phosphate 
dosages and phosphate residuals (plant tap and distribution) in the monthly 
operation report. 

• John O’Brien (Genesee County Drain Commissioner’s office) contacted DEQ 
staff in response to our October 22 e-mail. The Lapeer County Road 
Commission (LCRC) has placed a stop work order on Contract S-4005; however, 
the Genesee County Drain Commissioner’s office contends that the LCRC has 
no authority to issue a stop work order; thus, work is continuing. DEQ stressed 
the importance to John of the need to keep the project moving forward and to 
confirm that the contractor is following proper soil erosion measures and other 
local guidelines that may apply. 

• Based on a discussion with Michael Glascow and Brent Wright, there have not 
been major distribution system issues or upsets since the switch back to Detroit 
Water and Sewerage Department. Utility operators were flushing and winterizing 
hydrants this week and flushing from the Flint Water Treatment Plant to the 
outside reaches of the distribution system. Phosphate residuals are also being 
measured twice per week at Flint’s bacteria monitoring sites. 

Additional Actions: 

• Representatives from DEQ, DLARA, and DHFIS met on October 23 with Mayor 
Dayne Walling and Howard Croft from the city of Flint for the weekly update. 

Each group gave an overview of actions that were taken over the course of the 
week. The DEQ discussed sample results from homeowners since the offer to 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


provide free lead and copper testing was made. The DEQ also discussed the 
school sampling protocol that was developed and would be used on Saturday, 
October 24, at Freeman Elementary School. DLARA discussed the plumbing 
assessment of Freeman Elementary School that was being conducted on Friday, 
October 23. DHHS gave an update on the prioritization schema for blood lead 
screening that was being conducted for Flint residents, with the highest priority 
going to individuals with the highest risk, including young children and infants. 


• After the weekly coordination meeting, the city of Flint gave a tour of the Flint 
Water Treatment Plant to coordination committee members from the DEQ, 
DLARA, and DHHS. The tour provided a complete picture of the treatment 
process for both sources of water that could potentially be used, including water 
from the Flint River and treated water coming from Detroit. There was also 
discussion on how water from the Karegnondi Water Authority would be 
distributed, along with discussion of the supplemental addition of corrosion 
control agents. 


• On Saturday, October 24, representatives of DEQ and DLARA conducted the 
first sampling event of Flint schools at Freeman Elementary School. Media from 
several news agencies were present to cover the initial sampling event and 
conducted interviews with Karen Tommasulo and footage was taken of the 
sampling process. The sampling team consisted of seven members, and it took 
a little over three hours to conduct the entire sampling event. There was a small 
group of protesters outside of the school who stayed there for approximately an 
hour and a half, after which they peacefully disbursed. 

After the sampling event, the samples were driven to the DEQ Laboratory and 
logged into the computer system. The Laboratory’s Inorganics Unit Supervisor 
was contacted and made aware of the status of the samples. The samples were 
then prepped on Sunday, October 25, and are scheduled for analysis on 
Monday, October 26. 


Links for media coverage of the sampling event are below: 


jines/State-beqins-extensive-testinq-of-water- 


plumbinq-inside-Flmt-Community-Schools-336669641 .htmS?device=phone&c=y 


http://nbc25nevvs.com/news/local/mdeq-tests-jead-levels-at-flint-schools 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


October 26, 2015 



Flint Water Public Health Response: MDHHS Action Plan Daily Summary 

10-22-15 


ACTION PLAN: FtLTER/FILTER REPLACEMENTS 

STATUS 

Filter Distribution 

• Residents may continue to obtain filters from 
GCCARD (both sites 9-4PM) and MDHHS clients can 
continue to obtain filters at the two MDHHS office 
locations or the GCCARD sites. 

• GCCARD working with UAW plumbers to provide 
home installs for vulnerable population including 
homebound, seniors, and dialysis. (Providing 
$20,000 in kind support). 147 installs completed as 
of 10-21-2015. 

No action indicated, informational only. 

Filter Replacement Distribution 

• The procedure is in place for replacement cartridge 
distribution including an abbreviated application for 
residents to apply for and obtain cartridge 
replacement. Cartridge replacement will occur at 
same locations as filter sites. 

ACTION: 

It is understood that MDHHS has obtained all available 
replacement cartridges from nationwide supply. Kris S will 
check with Chris Sanches (DHHS) to determine/verify 
availability of additional cartridges for purchase if needed. 

Estimated completion date: 10-23-15 

NEW ISSUE: Public Education Proper Filter Use 

• When used improperly, the filters will exceed their 
capacity limit in a much shorter time frame thereby 
increasing need for filter replacement much sooner 
than expected. 

ACTION: 

Jen Eisner will work with Hilda McShane to develop NEW 
public education material about proper use of cartridge AND 
how to obtain filter replacement cartridges, targeted for 
release week of October 26 during lead awareness week. 
This should be included with all filter replacement 
cartridges. 

Estimated Completion date: 10-26-15 

ACTION PLAN: LEAD TESTING IN CHILDREN/HIGH RISK 
GROUPS 

STATUS 

Testing Protocol: 

Draft protocol has been completed, undergoing final review. 
Protocol calls for testing: 

Priority groups- 

• Confirmatory venous testing for children who had 
venous testing (115 children) 

• Children in day care, Head Start 

• children attending 3 schools (Freeman, Eisenhower, 
Brownell) 

• Children residing in high risk zip codes (03, 04) 

• All other students 

Children/parents usual source of primary care. If no usual 
source of primary care, can obtain testing at GCHD. Mass 

ACTION: Finalize testing protocol by 10-23-15 (Wells/Peeler) 
ACTION: Share all materials with Medicaid (Wells/Peeler) 
ACTION: Contact MDE regarding sharing student list (Hertel) 
ACTION: Wells/Valacak will schedule a meeting with the 
Flint Schools superintendent to discuss parent education/ 
lead testing (Friday, October 23) 

ACTION: The list of kids with elevated blood levels will be 
cross referenced to see if their household has a filter. 
(Peeler/Scott) 


Page 1 of 2 














testing in school setting NOT recommended. 

Would like to obtain the student list from the three schools 
and cross reference with our lead testing data to determine 
children tested/not tested 


Parent education materials have been completed. 

GCHD has ability to work with their Head Start and Early 
head start programs to disseminate parent information 

ACTION: Call with Flint school superintendent, GCHD, and 
MDHHS scheduled 10-24-15 to discuss dissemination 
process. Will also contact Kyle Guerrant(MDE). (Hertel) 
Estimated Completion date: 10-23-15 

Provider educational material completed. 

Communication to providers will occur through GCHD and 
MDHHS networks (GCMS, GCARD, hospitals, etc) 

ACTION: Need to coordinate with GCHD. 
Estimated completion date: TBD (Wells/Peeler) 

Community public education and testing event: 

Working with GCHD to coordinate public testing and 
awareness events with health care providers and health 
plans in the Flint area. 

ACTION: McLaren Health Plan in conjunction with GCHD 
hosting a public testing and awareness event on November 
5 at the Burton GCHD site. McLaren will have providers on 
site to perform testing for their members; GCHD onsite to 
perform testing for all others. 

Event will also include Medicaid application assistance. 
ACTION: Tony Larocco (GCHD) has contacted Molina, Molina 
Health interested in sponsoring a similar community testing 
and awareness event. 

Estimated completion date: confirm Molina date by 
10-30-15 (LaRocco-GCHD) 

ACTION PLAN: ENVIRONMENTAL INVESTIGATION 


Wes Priem (MDHSS) developed a data collection document 
that will be in the testing protocol. The document collects 
additional information that will help expedite the 
environmental investigation process. 

No action indicated, informational only 


ACTION PLAN: FUNDING 

10-21-15 Funding for case management nurses will be No action indicated, informational only 

disseminated to GCHD through new project: Flint Water, for 

$425,000 through the Comprehensive Contract Egrams 

system, to fund the: Follow-up of Children Reported with 

Elevated Lead Levels: Case Management Services. GCHD 

advised to secure approvals for use of these funds and begin 

procedures to place staff in appropriate positions to conduct 

the work. 


Page 2 of 2 













From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 27, 2015 2:10 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 

(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. 

(DHHS) 

Subject: 2015-10-27 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 

CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 2015-10-27 Action Steps Week of October 26-30.pdf; 2015-10-27 Flint Drinking 

Water Action Plan Update.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 26-30, 201 5 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 26-30 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting held 10/22/15 

2. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of N RE PA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

3. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 

Panel created and press 
release issued on 10/21/15 

4. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


5. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


6. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

A meeting with the 10 
remaining schools is 
tentatively scheduled for the 
week of 1 0/26/1 5 

7. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Meeting scheduled for 
10/27/15 

8. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Summary of Flint’s corrosion 
control plan submitted to EPA 


FQIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 27, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 






























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

9. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Remaining items due are 
anticipated to be provided on 
10/27/15 

10. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Comments by DEQ to city of 
Flint have been provided 

11. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues; check 
weekly for status update 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Issues regarding soil erosion 
controls during construction 
are being addressed 

12. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Nearly 1 1 ,000 records 
received and waiting for 
review by DEQ staff 

13. 

Provide DHFIS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


14. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHFIS related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 

15. 

Create a generic school sampling 
guidance document for statewide 
distribution; target audience: 
schools served by municipal water 

DEQ and DLARA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Richard Benzie 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 27, 201 5 

























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

16. 

Confirm plumbing assessment and 
sampling is scheduled for Brownell 
K-2 STEM Academy and 
Eisenhower Elementary School 

DEQ and DLARA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Mike Prysby 

Tentatively scheduled for 
10/30/15 


F01A EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 27, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


3 









Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• A meeting has been confirmed for October 27 with DHHS to discuss all lead 
education material for schools. 

• DEQ staff discussed with the city of Flint’s consultant, Lockwood, Andrews & 
Newnam, Inc., the remaining items that are needed for issuance of Michigan’s 
Safe Drinking Water Act (Act 399) construction permit. Staff anticipates receiving 
these items on October 27. 

• DEQ staff obtained approximately 10,895 records from the city of Flint’s GIS 
system regarding service line index cards and extracted them into a table format 
for additional data review. Data review has been initiated by DEQ’s Lansing 
District Office staff. 

• DLARA and DEQ staff tentatively plans to conduct plumbing assessments at 
Brownell K-2 STEM Academy and Eisenhower Elementary School on 
October 30. DLARA staff will contact the Flint Community Schools’ facility 
administrator to confirm the date and approximate times. 

Additional Actions: 

• All of the 1 24 samples that were taken at Freeman Elementary School on 
Saturday, October 24, were analyzed by the DEQ Laboratory on Monday, 
October 26. The data is being compiled into a spreadsheet to allow an 
evaluation of the various sampling points. Initial indications are that there will 
need to be some replacement of plumbing fixtures, but issues do not seem to 
exist deeper into the plumbing infrastructure. Further sequential testing will be 
conducted at select points to verify that water is being drawn from the main. 

• DEQ staff met to discuss lessons learned from the sampling event at Freeman 
Elementary School. A number of observations were made with respect to how to 
streamline the process. The group agreed to incorporate several of the 
observations into the sampling protocol. The protocol is being updated to reflect 
these changes. 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


October 27, 2015 




From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 28, 2015 2:36 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 

(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. 

(DHHS) 

Subject: 2015-10-28 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 

CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 2015-10-28 Action Steps Week of October 26-30.pdf; 2015-10-28 Flint Drinking 

Water Action Plan Update.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 26-30, 201 5 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 26-30 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting held 10/22/15 

2. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of N RE PA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

3. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 

Panel created and press 
release issued on 10/21/15 

4. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


5. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


6. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

A meeting with the 10 
remaining schools is 
tentatively scheduled for the 
week of 1 0/26/1 5 

7. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Meeting held on 10/27/15; 
action items created 

8. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Summary of Flint’s corrosion 
control plan submitted to EPA 


FQIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 28, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 






























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

9. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Additional items provided; still 
need 2 more items 

10. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Comments by DEQ to city of 
Flint have been provided 

11. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues; check 
weekly for status update 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Issues regarding soil erosion 
controls during construction 
are being addressed 

12. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Cross-referencing process 
has begun 

13. 

Provide DHFIS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


14. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHFIS-related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Meeting held on 10/27/15; 
DHHS to provide materials 

15. 

Create a generic school sampling 
guidance document for statewide 
distribution; target audience: 
schools served by municipal water 

DEQ and DLARA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Richard Benzie 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 28, 201 5 

























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

16. 

Confirm plumbing assessment and 
sampling is scheduled for Brownell 
K-2 STEM Academy and 
Eisenhower Elementary School 

DEQ and DLARA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Mike Prysby 

Tentatively scheduled for 
10/30/15 


F01A EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 28, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


3 









Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• DEQ staff met with DHHS staff on October 27 to discuss all lead education 
material for schools, and action items were created. 

• On October 27 DEQ’s Lansing District Office received updated dosage, pump 
specifications, and cut-sheets for phosphate product. A quick glance at the 
submittal shows most of the requested information has been provided, except for 
the NSF Standard 60 certification and the maximum dose. Staff will cross- 
reference the NSF Web site to verify proper certification and maximum dose. If 
acceptable, DEQ staff will proceed with issuance of the Act 399 permit. 
Otherwise, the city of Flint’s consultant will need to provide the DEQ with the 
NSF Standard 60 certification and maximum dose information. 

• DEQ staff has cross-referenced 46 of the 326 historical lead and copper 
monitoring sampling sites with the 10,895 service line index card information 
records available to date. 

• DEQ staff met with DHHS staff to review and further develop childcare facility 
guidance and incorporate drinking water exposure information. Guidance is 
being provided by DHHS specific to the Genesee County emergency order, and 
separate guidance for statewide use will also be developed. 

Additional Actions: 

• Preliminary follow-up review of sampling event at Freeman Elementary School: 
DEQ and DLARA staff met and reviewed outlet/tap materials to correlate with 
sample results. DEQ staff contacted Jim Henry, Genesee County Health 
Department, to confirm the location of screening samples. The draft write-up is 
to be completed by DEQ staff on October 28. 

• The weekly meeting between DEQ, DLARA, and DHHS was held. Discussion 
topics included a review of the results for Freeman Elementary School, along 
with a discussion of what the results meant and how the data would be presented 
to the Flint Community Schools Superintendent so that the information could be 
used to create an action plan for the school. Discussion also included working 
out the logistics for conducting the plumbing evaluation and subsequent sampling 
for the other two elementary schools that had results above the action level 
during the initial screen of 13 schools. Plans are in process to conduct these two 
plumbing evaluations on Friday, October 30, with the sampling to take place on 
Saturday, October 31 . 

Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


October 28, 2015 





From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Thursday, October 29, 2015 1:11 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 

(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. 

(DHHS) 

Subject: 2015-10-29 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 

CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 2015-10-29 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update.pdf; 2015-10-29 Action Steps 

Week of October 26-30.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 26-30, 201 5 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• Discussion held on October 28 with EPA’s Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force 
(Task Force) concerning monitoring results at Freeman Elementary School. A 
report that summarizes the results of the samples collected from the school for 
the lead analysis has been drafted. 

• DEQ staff discussed the items needed for the corrosion control treatment plan. 
An outline of a Corrosion Treatment Operation letter has been prepared. The 
letter will be finalized and sent to the city of Flint. Water quality parameter 
monitoring and laboratory certification was also discussed with the EPA’s Task 
Force. 

• DEQ staff completed the review and verified NSF Standard 60 conformance, 
proper dosage, and feed pump sizing. The Act 399 permit for the installation of 
the phosphate feed equipment was issued on October 28. 

• Coordinated with the DEQ Laboratory to create and produce the “Request for 
Water Analysis Forms” and the bottle order needed for sampling at Brownell K-2 
STEM Academy and Eisenhower Elementary School on Saturday, October 31 . 

Additional Action: 

DEQ Director Dan Wyant and DEQ staff met with DHHS Director Nick Lyon and DHHS 
staff to discuss coordination of the messaging of data related to Flint water and blood 
samples. It was agreed that it was important to ensure that the water and blood data 
are put into context with respect to each other. Discussion also involved creating a 
message that discusses what lead concentrations in water mean from a regulatory and 
from a health-based perspective. Current regulations are not in step with current 
health-based exposure models, so additional work needs to be done to ensure a 
comprehensive message that is clear. 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


October 29, 2015 


City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 26-30 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting held 10/22/15 

2. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of N RE PA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

3. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 

Panel created and press 
release issued on 10/21/15 

4. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


5. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


6. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

A summary report for 
Freeman Elementary School 
has been drafted 

7. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Meeting held on 10/27/15; 
action items created 

8. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Meeting held on 10/28/15 to 
discuss comments 


FQIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 29, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 






























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

9. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Act 399 permit issued 
10/28/15 

10. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Comments by DEQ to city of 
Flint have been provided 

11. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues; check 
weekly for status update 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Issues regarding soil erosion 
controls during construction 
are being addressed 

12. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Cross-referencing process 
has begun 

13. 

Provide DHFIS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


14. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHFIS-related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Meeting held on 10/27/15; 
DHHS to provide materials 

15. 

Create a generic school sampling 
guidance document for statewide 
distribution; target audience: 
schools served by municipal water 

DEQ and DLARA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Richard Benzie 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 29, 201 5 

























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

16. 

Confirm plumbing assessment and 
sampling is scheduled for Brownell 
K-2 STEM Academy and 
Eisenhower Elementary School 

DEQ and DLARA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Mike Prysby 

Sampling materials have 
been requested from DEQ 
Laboratory 


F01A EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 29, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


3 









From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Friday, October 30, 201 5 1 1 :29 AM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth (GOV); 

Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. 

(DHHS) 

Subject: 201 5-1 0-30 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 

CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 201 5-1 0-30 Action Steps Week of October 26-30.pdf; 201 5-1 0-30 Flint Drinking Water Action 

Plan Update.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 26-30, 201 5 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 26-30 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Meeting held on 10/29/15 to 
discuss time line 

2. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of N RE PA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

3. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 

Panel created and press 
release issued on 10/21/15 

4. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 

Negotiations underway to 
contract with the Genesee 
County Health Department 

5. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


6. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

A summary report for 
Freeman Elementary School 
has been drafted 

7. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Meeting held on 10/27/15; 
action items created 

8. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Meeting held on 10/28/15 to 
discuss comments 


FQ1A EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 30, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

9. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Act 399 permit issued 
10/28/15 

10. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Comments by DEQ to city of 
Flint have been provided 

11. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues; check 
weekly for status update 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Issues regarding soil erosion 
controls during construction 
are being addressed 

12. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Cross-referencing process 
has begun 

13. 

Provide DHFIS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


14. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHFIS-related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Meeting held on 10/27/15; 
DHHS to provide materials 

15. 

Create a generic school sampling 
guidance document for statewide 
distribution; target audience: 
schools served by municipal water 

DEQ and DLARA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Richard Benzie 

Final draft of school sampling 
protocol has been written and 
is awaiting final review 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 30, 201 5 

























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

16. 

Confirm plumbing assessment and 
sampling is scheduled for Brownell 
K-2 STEM Academy and 
Eisenhower Elementary School 

DEQ and DLARA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Mike Prysby 

Sampling materials have 
been requested from DEQ 
Laboratory 


F01A EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 30, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


3 









Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• Weekly internal After Action Plan meetings are being held. The topics of 
discussion for the meeting held on October 29 included a status update of the 
time line of events. It was agreed that a long-term comprehensive time line 
needed to be created, but an outline written at a higher level was needed within 
the next week to present to the Governor’s After Action Review Panel. Additional 
discussion topics included an internal evaluation of the Safe Drinking Water Act, 
1976 PA 399, as amended, as well as the federal lead and copper rule to 
determine what, if any, actions were implemented incorrectly. 

• Negotiations between the Genesee County Health Department (GCHD) and the 
DEQ have begun to set up a contract to utilize GCHD resources to conduct 
sampling of schools within the Flint Community Schools as well as parochial 
schools, charter schools, and childcare facilities. 

• The final draft of the school sampling protocol has been written and is awaiting 
final review. This version of the protocol incorporates comments by the EPA and 
will be used to sample at Eisenhower Elementary School and Brownell K-2 
STEM Academy on Saturday October 31 . Experiences from the sampling of 
Freeman Elementary School on Saturday October 24, were used to create the 
final draft, and experiences from Eisenhower and Brownell will be used to 
determine if any further changes are required. 


Prepared by: 


George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


'ctober 30, 2015 


From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, November 02, 2015 2:37 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 

(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. 

(DHHS) 

Subject: 2015-11-02 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 

CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 2015-11-02 Action Steps Week of October 26-30.pdf; 2015-11-02 Flint Drinking 

Water Action Plan Update.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 26-30, 201 5 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Effective today, we will prepare the attached reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the 
previous week’s actions. 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 26-30 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Meeting held on 10/29/15 to 
discuss time line 

2. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of N RE PA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

3. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 

Panel created and press 
release issued on 10/21/15 

4. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 

Negotiations underway to 
contract with the Genesee 
County Health Department 

5. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


6. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

A summary report for 
Freeman Elementary School 
has been drafted 

7. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Meeting held on 10/27/15; 
action items created 

8. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

EPA’s comments were 
addressed, and a letter was 
e-mailed to the city of Flint on 
10/30/15 


FQ1A EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

November 2, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

9. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Act 399 permit issued 
10/28/15 

10. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Comments by DEQ to city of 
Flint have been provided 

11. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues; check 
weekly for status update 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Issues regarding soil erosion 
controls during construction 
are being addressed 

12. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Cross-referencing process 
has begun 

13. 

Provide DHFIS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


14. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHFIS-related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Meeting held on 10/27/15; 
DHHS to provide materials 

15. 

Create a generic school sampling 
guidance document for statewide 
distribution; target audience: 
schools served by municipal water 

DEQ and DLARA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Richard Benzie 

Final draft of school sampling 
protocol has been written and 
is awaiting final review 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 November 2, 201 5 

























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

16. 

Confirm plumbing assessment and 
sampling is scheduled for Brownell 
K-2 STEM Academy and 
Eisenhower Elementary School 

DEQ and DLARA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Mike Prysby 

Assessments confirmed and 
complete 


F01A EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

November 2, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


3 









Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• Comments on the corrosion control treatment plan received late in the day on 
October 30 from EPA were addressed, and the letter to the city of Flint regarding 
operational and monitoring conditions related to corrosion control was finalized. 

A PDF of the letter was e-mailed on October 30 to the city of Flint et at. 

• Staff from DLARA and DEQ conducted plumbing assessments at both Brownell 
and Eisenhower Elementary Schools on October 30. Sampling taps were 
identified and labeled. Based on the plumbing assessment, a sampling 
sequence was recommended for each school. 

Additional Actions: 

• DEQ Flint Action Plan Coordinator George Krisztian and DEQ Public Information 
Officer Karen Tommasulo met with representatives of DLARA, DHHS, and city of 
Flint officials, including Mayor Dayne Walling, to discuss progress made since 
the last meeting and to discuss actions to come in the week of November 2. 
Topics included the issuance of a construction permit that would enable the city 
of Flint to provide supplemental phosphate addition to the water coming from 
Detroit. A high level summary regarding the progress of the testing for lead in 
drinking water in the Flint schools was provided with a subsequent discussion by 
the group as a whole. Mayor Walling inquired as to how remediation of the 
schools would be funded, and he was informed that funding was outside the 
purview of the initial assessment. 

• Staff from DEQ and DLARA conducted water sampling at Brownell K-2 STEM 
Academy and Eisenhower Elementary School on Saturday, October 31 . In 
addition, staff went back to Freeman Elementary School to pull sequential 
samples as per comments from EPA regarding DEQ’s sampling protocol. The 
sequential samples were also taken at Brownell and Eisenhower. Complete 
sampling protocols have now been conducted at three Flint schools. There were 
a total of 374 samples taken at the three schools on October 31 . 

• As provided by DHHS, the purchased total water filter/pitcher distribution for the 
period of October 6 through October 29 is 9,880 units. 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


ovember 2, 201 5 






From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Monday, November 09, 2015 1:10 PM 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 
(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. 
(DHHS) 

2015-11-09 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 
CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

2015-11-09 Action Steps Week of November 2-6.pdf; 2015-11-09 Flint Drinking 
Water Action Plan Update.pdf; Freeman Elementary Report Final.pdf; Freeman 
Elementary Final Lead Results.pdf; Freeman Elementary Final Copper Results.pdf; Flint 
Home Owner Data by ZIP Code (09-03 thru 11-05-15). pdf; Flint Home Owner Data by 
Concentration (09-03 thru 11-05-15). pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document for the week of November 2-6, 201 5 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

3. Freeman Elementary Report Final 

4. Freeman Elementary Final Lead Results 

5. Freeman Elementary Final Copper Results 

6. Flint Flome Owner Data by ZIP Code 

7. Flint Home Owner Data by Concentration 

As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. 

Morgan, When sending these data results to the Governor, you may want to consider 
keeping documents 4-7 as separate pdfs for the Governor, in lieu of assembling them 
all together in one pdf, but I’ll make that your call. (Thanks, Mary Beth) 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


1 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of November 2-6 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Meeting held on 10/29/15 to 
discuss time line 

2. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of N RE PA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

3. 

Assist After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 

Panel created and press 
release issued on 10/21/15 

4. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 

Negotiations underway to 
contract with the Genesee 
County Health Department 

5. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


6. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

A summary report for 
Freeman Elementary School 
has been drafted 

7. 

Contact DHHS regarding lead 
education material for schools; 
provide information as requested by 
DHHS 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Meeting held on 10/27/15; 
action items created 

8. 

Follow up with city of Flint regarding 
corrosion control treatment and their 
plans to address requirements and 
options provided for in 1 0/30/1 5 
DEQ letter 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 



FQ1A EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

November 9, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 
































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

9. 

E-mail city of Flint regarding timing 
to install corrosion control now that 
the construction permit has been 
issued 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

E-mailed city of Flint on 
1 1 /4/15; 1 1 /5/1 5 response 
indicated equipment to be 
ordered and plan to start 
installing feed piping on 
11/9/15 

10. 

Review Monthly Operation Reports 
(MORs) for Standby Operation of 
Flint Water Treatment Plant with city 
of Flint; draft letter to city of Flint 
documenting Standby Operation 
requirements 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Letter is drafted and will be 
sent to city of Flint the week 
of 1 1 /9/1 5; MOR review with 
city of Flint will be conducted 
during next routine site visit 

11. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues; check 
weekly for status update 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Issues regarding soil erosion 
controls during construction 
are being addressed 

12. 

Continue evaluating city of Flint 
Service Line Record status and 
comparison to sampling pool 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Letter requesting additional 
information/documentation to 
be provided to city of Flint on 
11/9/15 

13. 

Provide DHHS with any available 
cross-reference information 
regarding lead service lines and 
plumbing materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


14. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHHS-related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Meeting held on 10/27/15; 
DHHS to provide materials 

15. 

Develop draft sampling protocol for 
residential exposure assessment for 

DHHS 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 

Draft document under 
development; discussed 
preliminary plan with DHHS 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 November 9, 201 5 


























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 






16. 

Make progress on drafting a generic 
school sampling guidance document 
for statewide distribution; target 
audience: schools served by 
municipal water 

DEQ and LARA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Richard Benzie 

Draft document under 
development to make it an 
easy-to-read and follow 
guidance document 

17. 

Attend 11/5/15 meeting arranged by 
DHHS regarding residential elevated 
blood lead investigations and water 
testing 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
George Krisztian 
Steve Busch 

Done 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

3 November 9, 2015 












Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


Key Actions : 

• The city of Flint has received the necessary building permits to move forward 
with plans for the supplemental addition of phosphate to water that is coming 
from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. The purpose of the 
supplemental addition of phosphate is to reestablish the protective coating 
throughout the distribution system. This protective coating slows the leaching 
process of lead from service lines, household fixtures, and solder used for 
connecting copper pipes. The city of Flint has made the purchase of the 
necessary equipment a high priority and hopes to have the pumps installed and 
running within the next month. 

• The report for Freeman Elementary School that documents and explains the 
results of the plumbing evaluation conducted by the DEQ and DLARA has been 
completed and will be distributed on November 9. The report demonstrates that 
the issues in the school are fixture-specific and that there was no evidence found 
to suggest that significant lead contamination is occurring deep within the 
plumbing system. The report will recommend replacement of fixtures that were 
found to have lead levels exceeding 15 parts per billion. Once a press release 
has been issued, the report will be posted to the Flint water Web site: 

www. m i . q o v/f I i ntwate r . 

• Data for residents of the city of Flint have been compiled into spreadsheets that 
sort the data by ZIP Code and also by concentration. The data to date indicate 
that the issue of lead contamination is not system-wide but is site specific. Over 
three quarters of the samples showed lead levels of 5 parts per billion or less and 
over 91 percent of the samples were at levels of 15 parts per billion or less. 

These spreadsheets will also be posted to the Flint water Web site. 

Positions : 

• With respect to the school data and the samples submitted by residents through 
the free lead testing program, the issue of lead contamination in the water 
appears to be site specific. In both cases, the water within the distribution 
system does not appear to be the issue. The contamination appears to be 
coming from fixtures, solder used to connect copper, and from lead service lines. 
While the initial results are encouraging and show that the large majority of 
homes do not have an issue, it is important that residents do not make 
assumptions. The only way to know if water contains lead is to have it tested. 

Concerns : 

• The action level of 1 5 parts per billion that is used in the lead and copper rule 
(LCR) was set up to determine if a supply was utilizing optimized corrosion 
controls. It was not meant to serve as a health-based exposure model. The 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


DEQ will be releasing data on Freeman Elementary School and residential data 
on November 9. The DHHS is currently working on evaluating blood lead levels 
on children in the city of Flint. It is important that when the DHHS is ready to 
present their data that the message they present does not inadvertently 
contradict information provided by the DEQ. While it is recognized that the 
ultimate goal is to have no detectable amount of lead in the water, this goal may 
not be practical as the DEQ utilizes the criteria as specified by the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 

• The State of Michigan is being criticized as a result of recent information coming 
to light that a significant number of samples were not collected from proper 
sampling locations as part of the sampling program in the city of Flint to 
demonstrate compliance with the LCR under Michigan’s Safe Drinking Water Act, 
1 976 PA 399, as amended (Act 399). Recently the city of Flint began to 
electronically convert customer service line information. This effort, along with 
statements by some of the city of Flint’s certified operators, directly conflicts with 
information certified by the city of Flint in documents referred to as LCR 
compliance monitoring certification reports. 

• Correspondence is drafted and will be sent to the city of Flint requesting that they 
provide appropriate documentation to demonstrate that the sampling locations 
selected and certified by the city of Flint comply with Act 399. In the absence of 
appropriate justification/documentation, the city of Flint may be subject to 
enforcement for violation of Act 399. 

Significant Event : 

• On November 3 the EPA issued a memorandum to address “certain concerns 
raised about the application of the [federal] 1991 Lead and Copper Rule, 
specifically the requirements pertaining to maintenance of optimal corrosion 
control treatment, in situations in which a large water system ceases to purchase 
treated water and switches to a new drinking water source.” This EPA 
memorandum further states: “This type of situation rarely arises and the 
language of the LCR does not specifically discuss such circumstances. After 
reviewing the rule with our Office of General Counsel, it appears that there are 
differing possible interpretations of the LCR with respect to how the rule’s optimal 
corrosion control treatment procedures apply to this situation....” This EPA 
memorandum clarifies the requirements should a situation like Flint occur again 
in the future. However, it clearly recognizes that the options chosen by Michigan 
were one interpretation or option of the LCR. 

Changes from Previous Report : 

• Staff e-mailed Michael Glasgow and Brent Wright of the city of Flint on 
November 4 to request a time line and a request to notify the DEQ when the 
phosphate equipment is installed. Mr. Wright responded on November 5 noting 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 3 


that the city of Flint just received the Act 399 permit in the mail on November 5. 
Equipment is to be ordered by November 6, and the Flint Water Treatment Plant 
operators plan to start installing the feed piping on November 9. 

• A letter detailing standby operation requirements is currently being prepared by 
the DEQ and will be sent to the city of Flint during the week of November 9. A 
review of the standby operation monthly operation reports with the city of Flint will 
be conducted during the next routine site visit at the Flint Water Treatment Plant. 

• A letter has been prepared that requests the city of Flint to provide additional 
information and documentation regarding all of their historic LCR compliance 
sampling sites and to compare the service line information reported on the LCR 
compliance monitoring certification reports against the service line information 
from the city of Flint’s digitized index cards. Conflicts noted between the index 
cards and the LCR compliance monitoring certification will need further 
explanation, and the city of Flint will need to provide supporting documentation 
demonstrating these sites meet Tier 1 criteria. The letter will be provided to the 
city of Flint on November 9. 

• The draft document for sampling protocol for residential exposure assessment is 
under development. DEQ staff discussed the preliminary plan with DHHS staff. 

• The draft document for generic school sampling guidance for statewide 
distribution is under development. Staff is working on making this an easy-to- 
read and follow guidance document. 

• DEQ staff met with DHHS staff on November 5 to discuss residential elevated 
blood lead investigations and a protocol for water testing. 

Other Items : 

• As provided by the DHHS, the purchased total water filter/pitcher distribution 
through November 6 is 13,649 units. 

• Attached are the: 

o Final report for the plumbing evaluation of Freeman Elementary School 

o Spreadsheets that consolidate the lead and copper data for Freeman 

Elementary School 

o Consolidated spreadsheets for water samples submitted by Flint residents 
sorted by ZIP Code and sorted by concentration 

Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


November 9, 2015 



Outlet ^ 





It 6 G Cl 111 111 © II Cl 8 X I © II S 


Ogema Avenue, Flint 


' A "> v 






On Friday, October 23, 2015, the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs (DLARA) and the Department 
of Environmental Quality (DEQ) conducted an assessment of Freeman Elementary School's plumbing system 
to gain a comprehensive understanding of how water moves through the building and what types of plumbing 
materials are used. The assessment identified the following potential sources of lead leaching into drinking water: 

• Lead solder joints on copper piping 

* Brass valves and brass fittings 

• Brass components in fixtures 

* Galvanized piping 


The assessment also identified 31 faucets or fountains that provide water for drinking, cooking, and/or food 
preparation. The team developed a sequence for samplingthe 31 faucets/fountains based on how the water travels 
through the building. 

On Saturday, October 24, 2015, the DEQ and the DLARA completed sampling of the 31 faucets/fountains, in 
the order determined by the plumbing assessment from the previous day, following a stagnation period of 12 
hours. At each of the 31 faucets/fountains identified, staff collected four samples. Two initial, 125-milliliter 
samples (PI and P2) were collected immediately after turning on the tap. The water was then flushed for 30 
seconds, and a third 125-milliliter sample (FI) was collected. Finally, the water was flushed for another two 
minutes, and the fourth 125-milliliter sample (F2) was collected. These samples were used to determine the 
impact of any lead sources in and around each specific faucet/fountain and its connecting plumbing. 

On Saturday, October 31, 2015, the DEQ completed consecutive sampling at three of the 31 faucets/fountains 
following a stagnation period of 12 hours. This sampling was used to determine the impact of any lead sources 
located deep in the supply plumbing. The three sites included one site near the building service line, one site 
near the plumbing mid-point, and one site at the far end of the plumbing system. At each of these three sites, 
staff collected 10, 1-liter samples. The 10 samples were collected immediately after turning on the tap, and 
consecutively, without any flushing time in between. 






A four-inch diameter cast iron water service line enters the school in the boiler room on the west wall. Piping 
in the boiler room immediately transitions into galvanized metal piping for cold water lines. Two separate 
galvanized cold water supply lines exit the boiler room. One in the northeast corner appears to serve the gym, 
auditorium, and proposed pre-K facilities on the north end of the school. The other exits the boiler room in the 
southwest comer and appears to serve the remainder of the school to the south, including the library. This line 
was also found to have grounding connections attached to the piping. Hot water is distributed in continuous 
loops that, feed from and return to a central water heater in the boiler room. Hot water piping material, where 
exposed, was copper piping with 50/50 lead solder joints. Brass valves were seen throughout the building. 


l 



The DEQ recommends school facilities take action if samples from any drinking water outlets show lead levels 
greater than 15 parts per billion. Based on the sampling conducted at 31 faucets/fountains on October 24, 
2015, the following nine drinking water outlets had lead water level results greater than 15 parts per billion. 
Each of these nine outlets is listed below with its sample results, including a description of the potential 
source(s) of lead, and recommended actions for the school to take. 


Outlet: Bubbler Drinking Fountain, Left(DWOOl) 


Location; Hallway outside Janitorial Room 
Resuits: Pl=40 parts per billion, P2=6 parts per billion 

Fl=4 parts per billion, F2=l part per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the 
bubbler itself. This bubbler fixture is believed to have a brass valve. 
The connection underneath the sink also appears to have some brass 
components, including the valve at the wall. 


Replacement of this bubbler tap and its connection plumbing with lead- 
free materials will significantly reduce lead exposure at this location. 

If replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing this tap for 3 minutes following 
periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 



Outlet: Sink Faucet (CF029) 

Location; DHHS Office, west wail 
Results: Pl=17 parts per billion, P2=12 parts per billion 

Fl=2 parts per billion, F2=norvdetect 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the 
faucet, and its connecting plumbing. Thefaucet is a Delta 400. This model 
faucet valve has brass components. This styie faucet also has a mixing 
valve that may allow mixing of hot and cold water. Connecting plumbing 
in the cabinet under the sink may aiso contain brass components. 

This faucet, also has an aerator at the outlet. The aerator should be removed, inspected for particulate 
accumulations, scrubbed clean, and reinstalled. If particulates are found, the aerator should be periodically 
checked and cleaned. 

Replacement of this faucet and its connection plumbing with lead-free materials will significantly reduce lead 
exposure at. this location. If replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing this tap 
for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 



2 


Location: Classroom 2, south wall 
Results: PI =16 parts per billion, P2=3 parts per billion 

Fl=l part per billion, F2=l part per billion 

These results were collected from the faucet portion of the fixture and 
suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the fixture itself. 

The make and model of this fixture is unknown, but appears to be made 
of chrome plated brass and may be connected on the underside of the 
sink using a brass nipple. 

Replacement of this fixture and its connection plumbing with lead-free 
materials will significantly reduce lead exposure atthis location, ff replacement is not currently feasible, sample results 
indicate that flushing this tap for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations 
and lead exposure. 



Outlet: Integrated faucet and bubbler fountain (CF014) 

Location: Classroom .1.0, north wall 
Results: P±=27 parts per billion, P2=7 parts per billion 

Fl=4 parts per billion, F2=3 parts per billion 

These results were collected from the faucet portion of the fixture and 
suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the fixture itself and 
its connecting plumbing. The make and model of this fixture is unknown, 
but appears to be made of chrome plated brass and may be connected 
on the underside of the sink using a brass nipple. Connecting plumbing 
in the cabinet under the sink may also contain brass components. 

Replacement of this fixture and its connection plumbing with lead-free materials will significantly reduce lead 
exposure atthis location. If replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing this tap 
for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 




Outlet: Sink Faucet (CF013) 

Location: Classroom 10, north wall 
Results: Pl=9 parts per billion, P2=18 parts per billion 

Fl=3 parts per billion, F2=3 parts per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the 
connecting plumbing with some contribution from the faucet itself. The 
faucet appears to be a Delta 500 series. This model faucet may have 
some brass components. This style faucet also has a mixing valve that 
may allow mixing of hot and cold water. Connecting plumbing in the 
cabinet under the sink should be checked for brass components, including brass valves. 

This faucet aiso has an aerator at the outlet. The aerator should be removed, inspected for particulate 
accumulations, scrubbed clean, and reinstalled. If particulates are found, the aerator should be periodically 
checked and cleaned. 

Replacement of this faucet and its connection plumbing with lead-free materials will significantly reduce lead 
exposure at this location. If replacement Is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing this tap 
for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 



Outlet: Sink Faucet (CF015) 

Location: Classroom 1.1, northeast corner 
Results: P1=1G2 parts per billion, P2=326 parts per billion 

F.l=14 parts per billion, F2=ii parts per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the 
connecting plumbing and from the faucet itself. The faucet is an older 
design that uses a brass tube approximately 8 inches in length between 
the hot and cold water valves and connects to the outlet under the sink. 

This brass tube may be the primary source of lead, explaining the higher 
second (P2) sample result. The faucet and valves may also contain brass 
components. Connecting plumbing in the cabinet under the sink should 
be checked for additional brass components, including brass valves. 

This faucet aiso has an aerator at the outlet. The aerator should be removed, inspected for particulate 
accumulations, scrubbed clean, and reinstalled. If particulates are found, the aerator should be periodically 
checked and cleaned. 

Replacement, of this faucet, and its connection plumbing with lead-free materials will significantly reduce lead 
exposure at this location and needs to be completed. If replacement is not currently feasible, DO NOT USE THIS 
FAUCET FOR DRINKING OR COOKING. 




Location; Classroom 19, east wall 
Results; Pl=23 parts per billion, P2=3 parts per billion 
Fl=4 part per billion, F2=3 parts per billion 

These results were collected from the faucet portion of the fixture and 
suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the fixture itself. 
The make and model of this fixture is unknown, but appears to be made 
of chrome plated brass and may be connected on the underside of the 
sink using a brass nipple. 


Replacement of this fixture and its connection plumbing with lead- 

free materials will significantly reduce lead exposure at this location. If replacement is not currently feasible, 
sample results indicate that flushing this tap for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce 
lead concentrations and lead exposure. 


Location: Classroom 14, west wall 
Results: Pl=36 parts per billion, P2=30 parts per billion 

Fl=17 parts per billion, F2=4 parts per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from 
the bubbler itself. This bubbler fixture appears to be made of chrome 
plated brass. This style bubbler typically has a 4-5-Inch brass fitting 
that connects to a 3-inch brass nipple on the underside of the sink. 
This would explain the higher concentrations in the first two sample 
results. The connection underneath the sink may also have some brass 
components and should be checked, including the valve. 



Replacement of this bubbler tap and its connection plumbing with lead-free materials will significantly reduce 
lead exposure at this location and should be completed. If replacement is not currently feasible, sample results 
indicate that flushing this tap for 3 minutes prior to each use and for at least 4 minutes following periods of 
stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. In general, use of this fountain for drinking 
water should be discouraged. 




Outlet: Bubbler fountain (CF031) 

Location: Proposed Pre-K Room, south wail 
Resuits: Pl=57 parts per billion, P2=3 parts per biliion 

Fl=2 parts per biliion, F2=non-deteet 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the 
bubbler itself. This bubbler fixture appears to be made of chrome plated 
brass. This bubbler has a brass fitting connection to a brass nipple. The 
connector hose is not expected to be contributing lead. 


Replacement of this bubbler tap and its connection plumbing with lead- 
free materials will significantly reduce lead exposure at. this location and should be completed. If replacement 
is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing this tap for 3 minutes following periods of 
stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 



6 


While the remaining 22 outlets showed sample results to be at levels requiring no further action, several 
recommendations have been identified. 

The fourth sample at each of these 2.2 outlets following approximately 3 minutes of use and flushing at a 
reduced flow reduced lead concentrations to 4 parts per billion or less. This indicates that flushing of all taps 
used for drinking, cooking, and/or food preparation for 4 minutes following periods of stagnation will further 
reduce lead exposure. It is recommended that a flushing operational procedure be developed for use by staff 
responsible for plumbing operations and maintenance. 

Twelve of these outlets are comprised of similar materials as the outlets listed above and could potentially 
experience higher lead levels under extended periods of stagnation. These faucets/fountains include: 

» Sink Side Bubbler Units in Classroom 12(CF022), Classroom 5 (CF0G9), Classroom 21(CFG28), Hallway 
Fountain (DW002), Classroom 15 (CF018), Classroom 17 (CF020), and Classroom 1 (DW005). 

* Integrated Faucet. Bubbler Fountain Units in Classroom 6 (CF010), Classroom 9 (CF012), Classroom 4 
(CF008), Classroom 3 (CF007), and Classroom 7 (CFOll). 

Replacement, of these fixtures with lead-free materials is also recommended. 

The remaining .1.0 outlets showed sample results of 15 parts per billion or less, requiring no further action or 
additional recommendations. These faucets/fountains include: 

« Sink Faucets in Classroom 1 (CF004), Classroom 15 (CF017), Classroom 17 (CF019), Classroom 12 
(CF021), Classroom 19 (CF023), Classroom .1.4 (CF025), Classroom 21 (CF027), and Proposed Pre-K 
Room (CF030). 

• Kitchen Sink (cold) in the Community Room (KC003). 

» Sink Side Bubbler Fountain in Classroom 11 (CF016). 


7 



^ ^ ^ <? O * <C? S ^ t C & ^ •Hi P. ■: ^ 5 H S ^ S'? Phs?V>h^Ht SY5&i5r* «'^ -ftf* $\ ?*<* 

v^v? > fv.^V'^i*-' s.^ Vv v\3i ^ 5 !> }> * f > W\.H\ S f w > i W 3w 5\£i> * 5«^ ^ % >; ^ ^ f V? ■; ' v^vf* v' v? ^ 


The consecutive samples taken at three sites in the building on October 31, 2015, provide additional 
confirmation that the highest contribution of lead appears to be from the individual faucet/fountains and not 
from the larger diameter supply plumbing within the school building. 



Proposed Pre-K Rrrr Sink Faucet 

Hill 

Classroom 1.1. 

Sink Faucet ;CF015> 

lllli&ri 21 
Sink Rtucet (CF027) 


2 1 N D ND ND 

62 8 8 7 7 

2 ND ND ND ND 


ND ND ND ND ND 

7 7 6 6 6 

ND ND ND ND ND 


The continued presence of lead in samples collected at Classroom 11 (CF015) may be a result of lead 
particulates caught in the aerator/screen installed on the faucet outlet or may be from a source of lead 
further back in the plumbing system. However, the non-detect results from consecutive samples collected in 
Proposed Pre-K Room (CF030) and Classroom 21 (CF027) suggest any additional source of lead associated 
with Classroom 11 (CF015) is localized to the plumbing branch serving this faucet. The faucet aerator/screen 
in Classroom 11 (CF015) should be removed and inspected before completing a more in-depth plumbing 
analysis. Consecutive sampling results at Classroom 11 (CF015) support the water use restrictions specified 
for this outlet 


8 



0.010 


0.003 


0.001 

0.001 


0.004 


07 

00 


0.000 


0.009 


0.002 


i2 

il 


4 

ill 

13 


0.003 


0.005 

0.004 

0.009 

0.007 

0.000 

0.000 

0.012 


Classroom 12 


Classroom 12 


Classroom 12 
Classroom 12 


Classroom 12 


Classroom 12 
Classroom 12 


Classroom 12 


Classroom 5 


Classroom 5 


Classroom 5 
Classroom 5 
Classroom 11 
Classroom 11 
Classroom 11 
[Classroom 11 
Classroom 11 



ICF009 
|CF009 
fCFOilSi 
! CFO 15 
| CF015 
ilCFOiS'i 

ICF016 


Classroom 11 
Classroom 11 
Classroom 11 
Classroom 21 
Classroom 21 
Classroom 21 
Classroom 21 
Classroom 6 



Classroom 6 
Classroom 6 
Classro om 6 
Classroom 21 
Classroom 21 
Classroom 21 
Classroom 21 
Classroom 19 


Classroom 19 
Classroom 19 
Classroom 1 9 
Community Room 
Community Room 
Community Room 
Community Ftoom 
Classroom 19 
Classroom 19 
Classroom 19 
Classroom 19 
Hallway 
Hallway 
Hallway 
Hallway 
Classroom 9 
Classroom 9 
Classroom 9 
Classroom 9 
Hallway 
Hallway 
Hallway 
Hallway 


ICF024 

|CF024 

j&mr 

KC003 
KC003 
KC003 
KC003 
| CFO 2 3 
I CF023 
ICF023 
ICF023 

I d woo 2 

fDW002 

IDW002 

[DWbd2 

[CF012 

fcFbir 

|CF012 

ICF012 

DW001 

DW001 

Id wool 
Id wool 


First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 


Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 


Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 
Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 
; First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 


Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 


Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 


First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 


Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 
Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 
First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
; Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 
(Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 
First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 


Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 
|Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 
First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 
Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 
I First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 


Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
l Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 
[Flush ^ take n 2 minutes after First Flush 
First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 


Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 


First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 
Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 
First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 
Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 
First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 
Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 
First Prim airy draw of 1 25 mi 1 1 1 liters 
Second Primary draw of 125 miilil iters 
Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 
Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 
First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 
Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 
First Primary draw of 125 rriililiiters 
Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 
Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 






























Bill 

11 

J§jJ 



alllll 


j Lead 

0.014 

Classroom 15 

CF018 

pi 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

! ead 

0.005 

Classroom 15 

CF018 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 

lltll 8 


Classroom 15 

CF018 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 

aais 


Classroom 15 

CF018 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Lead 

W flf 


Classroom 15 

CF017 

PI 

First Prim ary draw of 125 mi 1 1 i liters j 

Lead 

0.014 


Classroom 15 

CF017 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 



Classroom 15 

CF017 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 



Classroom 15 

CF017 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Lead | 

im! 

gppill 

DHHS Office 

CF029 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 

0.012 

DHHS Office 



Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 



DHHS Office 

MiiWlMMMHMMI 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 

0.000 


DHHS Office 

CF029 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Lead 

(1013 


Classroom 4 

CF008 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 

0.006 


Classroom 4 

CF008 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 m il lil iters 

Lead 

0.001 


Classroom 4 

CF008 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 

Ooo 


Classroom 4 

CF008 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Lead 

0.007 


Classroom 3 

CF007 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 millil iters 

j 1 ead 

0.006 

Classroom 3 


P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 



Classroom 3 



Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 



Classroom 3 

annul 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Lead 

1|| 

11111111111 

Classroom 10 

CF014 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 



Classroom 10 

rl 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 



Classroom 10 


F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 

0.003 


Classroom 10 


F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

1 ead 

Lead ;j 

Lead | 


■■ 

Classroom 14 
Classroom 14 
Classroom 14 


PI 

P2 

F01 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 
Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 

0.004 


Classroom 14 

mml 

ro 2 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Lead 

0.005 


Classroom 17 


pi 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 

0.003 


Classroom 17 

SHH 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 

0.001 

Classroom 17 

BPiai 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 

tMiP, 


Classroom 17 

ppp 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Lead 



Classroom 14 


PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 



Classroom 14 


P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 

ft 


Classroom 14 


F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 



Classroom 14 


F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Lead 

s 


Classroom 10 


PI 

First Prim ary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 


lllllll 

Classroom 10 


P2 - 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 



Classroom 10 


F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 



Classroom 10 


F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Lead 

0.013 


Classroom 17 

ni 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 



Classroom 17 


P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 



Classroom 17 


F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

: Lead 

s 

BWi 

Classroom 17 

iSI 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

; Lead 

Sill 

Classroom 2 

mmmmm 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 



Classroom 2 


P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 

eMs i 


Classroom 2 


F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 

§11 


Classroom 2 


F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Lead 



Classroom 7 

MftiiiBtlgtjg 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 

*f»ft 1 


Classroom 7 

CF011 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 



Classroom 7 

Eg* MM 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 

B 


Classroom 7 


F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Lead 



Proposed Pre K 

CF031 

pi 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters j 

Lead 



Proposed Pre K 

CF031 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters • 

Lead 



Proposed Pre K 

Wgif. S 7 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 



Proposed Pre K 


F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 






Bill 





j Lead 

0.010 Prc 

(posed Pre K 

CF030 

pi 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

1 ead 

0.003 i Prc 

(posed Pre K 

CF030 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 

0.007 Prc 

(posed Pre K 

CF030 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 

0.000 Prc 

(posed Pre K 

CF030 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Lead 

0ll2 Cia 

ssroom 1 

CF004 

"pi 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters j 

Lead 

0.007 Ida 

ssroom 1 

CF004 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 

0.004 cia 

ssroom 1 

CF004 

FOl 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 

0002 Cia 

ssroom 1 

CF004 

T02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Lead 

0.005 I Cia 

ssroom 1 

DW005 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 

0.003 Cia 

ssroom 1 

DW005 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Lead 

0.003 ; Cia 

ssroom 1 

DW005 

FOl 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Lead 

0.002 i Cia 

ssroom 1 

DW005 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Lead 

0.002 Crc 

(posed Pre K 

CF030 

~CA1 

First Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.001 rprc 

(posed Pre K 

CF636 

"CA2 

Second Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.000 j Prc 

(posed Pre K 

CF030 

CA3 

Third Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.000 Prc 

(posed Pre K 

CF030 

CA4 

Forth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.000 Prc 

(posed Pre K 

CF030 

CAS 

Fifth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.000 Prc 

(posed Pre K 

CF030 

CA6 

Sixth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.000 Prc 

(posed Pre K 

CF030 

CA7 

Seventh Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.000 Prc 

(posed Pre K 

CF030 

CA8 

Eigth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.000 Prc 

(posed Pre K 

CF030 

CA9 

Ninth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.000 Prc 

(posed Pre K 

CF030 

CA10 

Tenth Sequential Sample 

Lead 


ssroom 11 

CF015 

CB1 

First Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.008 Cia 

ssroom 11 

CF015 

CB2 

Second Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.008 Cia 

ssroom 11 

CF015 

CB3 

Third Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.007 Cia 

ssroom 11 

CF015 

CB4 

Forth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.007 Cia 

ssroom 11 

CF015 

CB5 

Fifth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.007 Cia 

ssroom 11 

CF015 

CB6 

Sixth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.007 :Cla 

ssroom 11 

CF015 

CB7 

Seventh Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.006 Cia 

ssroom 11 

CF015 

CB8 

Eigth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

6.666 pa 

ssroom 11 

CF015 

CB9 

Ninth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.006 Cia 

ssroom 11 

Cl 015 

CB10 

Tenth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.002 Cia 

ssroom 21 

CF027 

CC1 

First Sequential Sample 

Lead ’ 

0C00 Cia 

ssroom 21 

CF027 

~CC2 

Second Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.000 cia 

ssroom 21 

CF027 

CC3 

Third Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.000 Cia 

ssroom 21 

CF027 

"CC4 

Forth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0C00 CTi 

ssroom 21 

CF027 

CC5 

Fifth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.000 Classroom 21 

CF627 

CC6 

Sixth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.000 Classroom 21 

CF027 

CC7 

Seventh Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.000 Classroom 21 

CF027 

CC8 

Eigth Sequential Sample 

Lead 

0.000 Classroom 21 

CF027 

CC9 

Ninth Sequential Sa mple 

Lead 

0.000 Classroom 21 

CF027 

cclo 

Tenth Sequential Sample Iff 


Note: Results of "Not Detected" have been converted to a numerical value of zero to allow for ease of sorting 


Results in RED exceed 15 ppb 
1 ppb = 0.001 mg\L 







Copper 

0.32 

ICIassroom 12 

ICF022 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.17 

iCIassroom 12 

jCF022 

j P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.15 

ICIassroom 12 

SCF022 

; F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.15 

Classroom 12 

CF022 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.09 

Classroom 12 

CF021 

iPl 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.15 

Classroom 12 

CF021 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.14 

ICIassroom 12 

CF021 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.15 

jClassroom 12 

ICF021 

1 F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 



0.31 

Classroom 5 

CF009 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

ICopper 

0.28 

Classroom 5 

CF009 

IP2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.08 

Classroom 5 

CF009 


Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.07 

Classroom 5 

CF009 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.43 

Classroom 11 

CF015 

IPl 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.66 

Classroom 11 

CF015 

iP2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.19 

Classroom 11 

CF015 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.13 

Classroom 11 

CF015 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.99 

Classroom 11 

CF016 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

ICopper 

0.89 

Classroom 11 

CF016 

|P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.16 

Classroom 11 

CF016 

IF01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.13 

Classroom 11 

CF016 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

iCopper 

0.19 

Classroom 21 

CF027 

iPl 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.21 

Classroom 21 

CF027 

|P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.16 

Classroom 21 

CF027 

IF01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.15 

Classroom 21 

CF027 

1 F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.24 

Classroom 6 

CFOIO 

i pi 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.22 

Classroom 6 

CF010 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.17 

Classroom 6 

CF010 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.12 

Classroom 6 

CF010 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.17 

Classroom 21 

Cl 028 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.16 

Classroom 21 

CF028 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.15 

Classroom 21 

CF028 

i F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.15 

Classroom 21 

CF028 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.23 

Classroom 19 

CF024 

iPl 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.17 

Classroom 19 

CF024 

iP2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.16 

Classroom 19 

CF024 

; F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.16 

Classroom 19 

CF024 

IF02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.31 

Community Room 

KC003 

iPl 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.27 

Community Room 

KC003 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.14 

Community Room 

KC003 

IF01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.13 

Community Room 

KC003 

i F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.13 

Classroom 19 

CF023 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.18 

Classroom 19 

CF023 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.15 

Classroom 19 

CF023 

IF01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.15 

Classroom 19 

CF023 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.21 

Hallway 

DW002 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.10 

Hallway 

DW002 

iP2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.07 

Hallway 

DW002 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.00 

Hallway 

DW002 

i F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.23 

Classroom 9 

CF012 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

iCopper 

0.16 

Classroom 9 

CF012 

iP2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.11 

Classroom 9 

CF012 

IF01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.08 

Classroom 9 

CF012 

IF02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 






















Bill 

111 


HP 


Copper 

0.41 

Hallway DW001 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters i 

Copper 

0.29 

: Hallway DW001 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.17 


F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.00 


F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.20 

Classroom 15 {CF018 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.17 

iCIassroom 15 CF018 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.14 

Classroom 15 CF018 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.14 

ICIassroom 15 ICF018 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.17 

ICIassroom 15 CF017 

PI 

First Pri m a ry draw of 125 mil) lifters 

Copper 

0.29 

Classroom 15 CF017 

P2 

Second P rimary draw of 125 millil iters 

Copper 

0.17 

Classroom 15 CF017 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.15 

ICIassroom 15 CF017 

F02 

Flush Sample ta ken 2 minutes after “First Flush 

Copper 

0.59 

IDHS Office CF029 

"Pi 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.40 

DHS Office CF029 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 


DHS Office CF029 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.00 

DHS Office SCF029 

~F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.28 

Classroom 4 CF008 

PI 

First Prim ary draw of 1 25 milliliters 

Copper 

0.54 

Classroom 4 CF008 

"P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.17 

Classroom 4 CF008 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.15 

ICIassroom 4 CF008 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.17 

Classroom 3 iCF007 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.27 

Classroom 3 ;CF007 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.09 

Classroom 3 ICF007 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.07 

Classroom 3 ICF007 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.11 

Classroom ID CF014 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.10 

Classroom 10 CF014 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.10 

Classroom 10 Cl 014 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.08 

Classroom 10 CF014 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.75 

Classroom 14 ICF026 

pT" 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.66 

iCIassroom 14 |CF026 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

035 

Classroom 14 ?CF026 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.20 

iCIassroom 14 | CF026 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.16 

Classroom 17 CF019 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.15 

Classroom 17 CJ019 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.14 

Classroom 17 CF019 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.14 

Classroom 17 CF019 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.14 

Classroom 14 ICF025 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.25 

Classroom 14 CF025 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.17 

Classroom 14 (CF025 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.18 

iCIassroom 14 fCF025 

~F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.06 

Classroom 10 CF013 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.07 

Classroom 10 CF013 

P2 

Secon d P rimary draw of 1 25 mil If 1 iters 

Copper 

0.19 

Classroom 10 CF013 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.10 

Classroom 10 CF013 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.19 

Classroom 17 CF020 

“PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.16 

iCIassroom 17 ICF020 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.16 

iCIassroom 17 jCF020 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.14 

iCIassroom 17 ICF020 

~F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.17 

Classroom 2 CF006 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.22 

Classroom 2 CF006 

“P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 111 

Copper 

0.11 

Classroom 2 CF006 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.11 

Classroom 2 CF006 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 
















— 

MM 

1— 

BBBI 

mp 


Copper 

0.20 

jClassroom 7 


pi 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.15 

iCIassroom 7 


P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.11 

Classroom 7 


F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.06 

iCIassroom 7 

CF011 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.38 

i Proposed Pre K 

CF031 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.21 

i Proposed Pre K 

mimm 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.27 

i Proposed Pre K 

lllll:* - B 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.19 

i Proposed Pre K 

CF031 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.38 

i Proposed Pre K 

CF030 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

iCopper 

0.42 

Proposed Pre K 

CF030 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 


Proposed Pre K 

CF030 

F01 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

Copper 

0.21 

1 Proposed Pre K 

CF030 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.27 

Classroom 1 

CF004 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.25 

iCIassroom 1 

CF004 

P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 m il iil iters 

Copper 

0.21 

iCIassroom 1 

CF004 

"FOl 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

ICopper 

0.08 

iCIassroom 1 

CF004 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.10 

iCIassroom 1 

DW005 

PI 

First Primary draw of 125 millil iters 

iCopper 


iCIassroom 1 


P2 

Second Primary draw of 125 milliliters 

Copper 

0.09 

iCIassroom 1 

DW005 

FOl 

Flush Sample taken 30 Seconds after Second 

iCopper 

0.06 

iCIassroom 1 

DW005 

F02 

Flush Sample taken 2 minutes after First Flush 

Copper 

0.45 

Proposed Pre K 

CF030 

CA1 

First Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.37 

Proposed Pre K 

CF030 

CA2 

Second Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.22 

Proposed Pre K 

CF030 

CA3 

Third Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.22 

Proposed Pre K 

CF030 

CA4 

Forth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.21 

Proposed Pre K 

CF030 

CA5 

Fifth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.21 

Proposed Pre K 

CF030 

CA6 

Sixth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.20 

Proposed Pre K 

CF030 

CA7 

Seventh Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.20 

Proposed Pre K 

CF030 

CA8 

Eigth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.20 

Proposed Pre K 

CF030 

CA9 

Ninth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.20 

Proposed Pre K 

CF030 

CA10 

lenth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.40 

Classroom 11 

CF015 

CB1 

First Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.14 

Classroom 11 

CF015 

CB2 

Second Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.13 

Classroom 11 

CF015 

CB3 

Third Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.13 

Classroom .1.1 


jjjjEJ n 

Forth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.13 

Classroom 11 

CF015 

•] - ■ 

Fifth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.13 

Classroom 11 

CF015 

CB6 

Sixth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.13 

Classroom .1.1 

CF015 

CB7 

Seventh Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.12 

Classroom 11 


CB8 

Eigth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.12 

Classroom 11 

CF015 

CB9 

Ninth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.12 

iCIassroom 11 

CF015 

CB10 

Tenth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.16 

Classroom 21 

CF027 

CC1 

First Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.14 

Classroom 21 

CF027 

CC2 

Second Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.14 

Classroom 21 

CF027 

CC3 

Third Sequential Sample 

Copper 

OJA - 

Classroom 21 

CF027 

CC4 

Forth Sequential Sample 

iCopper 

0.14 

Classroom 21 

CF027 

CCS 

Fifth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.15 

iCIassroom 21 

CF027 

CC6 

Sixth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.15 

Classroom 21 

CF027 

CC7 

Seventh Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.15 

Classroom 21 

CF027 

CC8 

Eigth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.15 

Classroom 21 

CF027 

CC9 

Ninth Sequential Sample 

Copper 

0.15 

Classroom 21 

CF027 

CC10 

Tenth Sequential Sample 


Note: Results of "Not Detected" have been converted to a numerical value of zero to allow for ease of sorting 

None of the results for Copper exceeded 1.3 PPM 
1 ppb = 0.001 mg\L 


























ANALYTE (Cu) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

COPPER 

0.34 

COPPER 

0.19 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.59 

COPPER 

0.92 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.19 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.22 

COPPER 

0.33 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.36 

COPPER 

0.34 

COPPER 

0.49 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.50 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.05 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.15 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.52 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.61 

COPPER 

0.56 

COPPER 

0.59 

COPPER 

0.53 

COPPER 

0.61 

COPPER 

0.63 

COPPER 

0.71 

COPPER 

0.67 

COPPER 

0.45 

COPPER 

0.91 

COPPER 

0.80 

COPPER 

0.80 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 


ANALYTE (Pb) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 



48502 

48502 

48502 

48502 

48502 

48502 

48502 

48502 

48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
















































































































































































































































































ANALYTE (Pb) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 


ANALYTE (Cu) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

ZIP CODE 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.34 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.05 

48503 

COPPER 

0.50 

48503 

COPPER 

0.11 

48503 

COPPER 

0.63 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.13 

48503 

COPPER 

0.63 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.33 

48503 

COPPER 

0.46 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.22 

48503 

COPPER 

0.19 

48503 

COPPER 

0.19 

48503 

COPPER 

0.05 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.08 

48503 

COPPER 

0.07 

48503 

COPPER 

0.11 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.41 

48503 

COPPER 

0.15 

48503 

COPPER 

0.08 

48503 

COPPER 

0.13 

48503 

COPPER 

0.54 

48503 

COPPER 

0.72 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.25 

48503 

COPPER 

0.09 

48503 

COPPER 

0.31 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.62 

48503 

COPPER 

0.18 

48503 

COPPER 

0.18 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.07 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.14 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.11 

48503 

COPPER 

0.37 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.10 

48503 

















































































































































































































































































ANALYTE (Pb) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.007 

LEAD 

0.007 

LEAD 

0.007 

LEAD 

0.007 

LEAD 

0.008 

LEAD 

0.008 

LEAD 

0.008 


ANALYTE (Cu) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

ZIP CODE 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.15 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.16 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.11 

48503 

COPPER 

0.12 

48503 

COPPER 

0.08 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.16 

48503 

COPPER 

0.23 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.06 

48503 

COPPER 

0.24 

48503 

COPPER 

0.07 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.07 

48503 

COPPER 

0.22 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.05 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.09 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.06 

48503 

COPPER 

0.24 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.07 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.10 

48503 

COPPER 

0.15 

48503 

COPPER 

0.07 

48503 

COPPER 

0.11 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.41 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.22 

48503 

COPPER 

1.11 

48503 

COPPER 

0.07 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

















































































































































































































































































ANALYTE (Pb) 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


RESULT 

(mg/L) 


0.008 


0.009 


0.009 


0.010 


0.010 


0.011 


0.011 


0.015 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.001 


0.001 


0.001 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


ANALYTE (Cu) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

ZIP CODE 

COPPER 

0.36 

48503 

COPPER 

0.17 

48503 

COPPER 

0.07 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.16 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.18 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.06 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.29 

48503 

COPPER 

0.13 

48503 

COPPER 

0.06 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.00 

48503 

COPPER 

0.07 

48503 

COPPER 

0.57 

48503 

COPPER 

0.09 

48503 

COPPER 

0.13 

48503 

COPPER 

0.55 

48503 

COPPER 

0.18 

48503 

COPPER 

0.19 

48503 

COPPER 

0.14 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.08 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.23 

48504 

COPPER 

0.15 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.05 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.57 

48504 

COPPER 

0.07 

48504 

COPPER 

0.12 

48504 

COPPER 

0.16 

48504 

COPPER 

0.05 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.06 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.15 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.10 

48504 

COPPER 

0.10 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.14 

48504 


































































































































































































































































ANALYTE (Pb) 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


RESULT 

(mg/L) 


0.002 


0.003 


0.003 


0.003 


0.003 


0.004 


0.004 


0.004 


0.004 


0.005 


0.006 


0.006 


0.006 


0.007 


0.008 


0.008 


0.009 


0.011 


0.012 


0.015 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.001 


0.001 


0.001 


0.001 


0.001 


0.002 


0.003 


0.004 


0.004 


0.006 


0.007 


0.007 


0.008 


0.010 


0.013 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


ANALYTE (Cu) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

ZIP CODE 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.06 

48504 

COPPER 

0.18 

48504 

COPPER 

0.19 

48504 

COPPER 

0.12 

48504 

COPPER 

0.08 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.50 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.32 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.15 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.25 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

0.06 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48504 

COPPER 

1.04 

48504 

COPPER 

0.00 

48505 

COPPER 

0.06 

48505 

COPPER 

0.24 

48505 

COPPER 

0.00 

48505 

COPPER 

0.00 

48505 

COPPER 

0.00 

48505 

COPPER 

0.00 

48505 

COPPER 

0.00 

48505 

COPPER 

0.05 

48505 

COPPER 

0.06 

48505 

COPPER 

0.65 

48505 

COPPER 

0.10 

48505 

COPPER 

0.09 

48505 

COPPER 

0.00 

48505 

COPPER 

0.00 

48505 

COPPER 

0.20 

48505 

COPPER 

0.08 

48505 

COPPER 

0.06 

48505 

COPPER 

0.00 

48505 

COPPER 

0.00 

48505 

COPPER 

0.08 

48505 

COPPER 

gflllllllil 

48505 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.05 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.08 

48506 













































































































































































































































































ANALYTE (Pb) 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


RESULT 

(mg/L) 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.001 


0.001 


0.001 


0.001 


0.001 


0.001 


0.001 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.003 


0.003 


0.004 


0.006 


0.006 


0.006 


0.010 


0.012 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.001 


ANALYTE (Cu) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

ZIP CODE 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.26 

48506 

COPPER 

0.11 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.09 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.07 

48506 

COPPER 

0.06 

48506 

COPPER 

0.07 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.06 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.58 

48506 

COPPER 

0.05 

48506 

COPPER 

0.06 

48506 

COPPER 

0.15 

48506 

COPPER 

0.06 

48506 

COPPER 

0.55 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.11 

48506 

COPPER 

0.06 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.11 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.16 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.09 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48506 

COPPER 

0.07 

48506 

COPPER 


48506 

COPPER 

0.17 

48506 

COPPER 

0.07 

48506 

COPPER 

0.00 

48507 

COPPER 

0.27 

48507 

COPPER 

0.17 

48507 

COPPER 

0.07 

48507 

COPPER 

0.06 

48507 

COPPER 

0.00 

48507 

COPPER 

0.00 

48507 

COPPER 

0.00 

48507 

COPPER 

0.00 

48507 

COPPER 

0.00 

48507 

COPPER 

0.00 

48507 

COPPER 

0.00 

48507 

COPPER 

0.41 

48507 

COPPER 

0.00 

48507 

COPPER 

0.32 

48507 

COPPER 

0.00 

48507 












































































































































































































































































ANALYTE (Pb) 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


LEAD 


RESULT 

(mg/L) 


0.001 


0.001 


0.001 


0.001 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0.003 


0.003 


0.003 


0.004 


0.004 


0.005 


0.005 


0.005 


0.005 


0.005 


0.005 


0.007 


0.007 


0.008 


0.009 


0.010 


0.013 


0.014 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.002 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.001 


0.001 


0.002 


0.002 


0.003 


0.003 


ANALYTE (Cu) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.15 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.06 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.12 

COPPER 

0.37 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.11 

COPPER 

0.09 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.30 

COPPER 

0.05 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.12 

COPPER 

0.23 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.09 

COPPER 

0.14 

COPPER 

0.17 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.43 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.22 

COPPER 

0.06 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.13 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.58 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.42 


ZIP CODE 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48507 


48532 


48532 


48532 


48532 


48532 


48532 


48532 































































































































































































































































NOTES: 


1 PPB = 0.001 mg/L 

Lead values exceeding 0.015 mg/L and Copper results exceeding 1.3 mg/L are highlighted in red. 

Sample results of "Not Detected" have been replaced with a numerical value of zero for ease of sorting. 
Samples without a zip code did not have one provided on the accompanying paperwork. 













































ANALYTE (Cu) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.22 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.14 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.05 

COPPER 

0.27 

COPPER 

0.33 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.17 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.36 

COPPER 

0.17 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.06 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.34 

COPPER 

0.49 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.50 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.26 

COPPER 

0.11 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.34 


ANALYTE (Pb) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 



48503 

48503 

48503 
48507 

48504 
48506 

48506 

48507 

48503 

48504 

48506 

48504 
48532 
48532 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 

48503 

48507 
48506 

48505 

48506 

48504 
48506 


48505 

48506 
48506 
48503 

48503 

48504 


48503 

48503 

48503 

48503 

48503 

48503 

48503 

48503 

48503 

48503 
48506 

48504 
48506 
48506 
48506 
48506 
48504 
48532 


48502 













































































































































































































































































ANALYTE (Pb) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 


ANALYTE (Cu) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.09 

COPPER 

0.24 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.23 

COPPER 

0.15 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.05 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.15 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.06 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.19 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.52 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.43 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.05 

COPPER 

0.61 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.13 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.56 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.59 

COPPER 

0.53 

COPPER 

0.61 

COPPER 

0.63 

COPPER 

0.71 

COPPER 

0.67 

COPPER 

0.45 

COPPER 

0.91 

COPPER 

0.80 

COPPER 

0.80 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 


ZIP CODE 


48506 


48506 


48505 


48503 


48504 


48503 


48504 


48504 


48506 


48506 


48503 


48503 


48505 


48504 


48503 


48507 


48504 


48505 


48503 


48504 


48503 


48506 


48507 


48502 


48507 


48503 


48503 


48532 


48507 


48504 


48503 


48507 


48507 


48503 


48506 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48507 


48507 


48507 












































































































































































































































































ANALYTE (Pb) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.000 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 


ANALYTE (Cu) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.41 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.06 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.57 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.32 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.34 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.05 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.50 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.06 

COPPER 

0.11 

COPPER 

0.63 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.58 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.05 

COPPER 

0.59 

COPPER 

0.05 

COPPER 

0.06 

COPPER 

0.12 

COPPER 

0.13 

COPPER 

0.58 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.63 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.33 

COPPER 

0.46 

COPPER 

0.16 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 


ZIP CODE 


48532 


48506 


48507 


48507 


48506 


48506 


48503 


48504 


48504 


48503 


48503 


48507 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48505 


48503 


48502 


48505 


48503 


48506 


48504 


48507 


48503 


48507 


48503 


48506 


48505 


48506 


48506 


48503 


48503 


48507 


48506 


48506 


48503 


48506 


48502 


48505 


48505 


48504 


48503 


48507 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48504 


48503 


48507 














































































































































































































































































ANALYTE (Pb) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.001 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 


ANALYTE (Cu) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

COPPER 

0.22 

COPPER 

0.19 

COPPER 

0.19 

COPPER 

0.05 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.05 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.06 

COPPER 

0.11 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.15 

COPPER 

0.06 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.22 

COPPER 

0.41 

COPPER 

0.92 

COPPER 

0.15 

COPPER 

0.15 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.13 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.65 

COPPER 

0.10 

COPPER 

0.54 

COPPER 

0.72 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.25 

COPPER 

0.10 

COPPER 

0.15 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.09 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.06 

COPPER 

0.55 

COPPER 

0.31 

COPPER 

0.06 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.11 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.19 

COPPER 

0.62 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.18 


ZIP CODE 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48504 


48503 


48506 


48503 


48504 


48507 


48507 


48504 


48503 


48504 


48503 


48532 


48503 


48502 


48504 


48503 


48503 


48504 


48503 


48504 


48505 


48504 


48503 


48503 


48507 


48503 


48502 


48503 


48504 


48506 


48507 


48503 


48504 


48506 


48506 


48503 


48507 


48506 


48506 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48502 


48503 


48507 


48503 
















































































































































































































































































ANALYTE (Pb) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.002 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.003 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 


ANALYTE (Cu) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.18 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.14 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.14 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.11 

COPPER 

0.37 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.10 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.12 

COPPER 

0.06 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.37 

COPPER 

0.15 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.06 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.16 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.18 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.11 

COPPER 

0.42 

COPPER 

0.19 

COPPER 

0.12 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.10 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.16 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.12 

COPPER 

0.23 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.09 

COPPER 

0.11 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.11 

COPPER 

0.06 



48503 

48503 

48503 

48504 

48503 

48504 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 
48503 

48503 

48504 
48503 
48503 

48503 
48507 

48504 
48503 
48503 
48507 
48503 
48503 
48506 
48503 
48506 
48503 

48503 

48504 



48504 
48503 
48503 
48507 

48505 
48503 

48503 

48502 

48504 

48503 
48503 
48503 

48503 

48505 

48506 

48504 

48507 
48503 














































































































































































































































































ANALYTE (Pb) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.004 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.005 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.006 

LEAD 

0.007 

LEAD 

0.007 

LEAD 

0.007 

LEAD 

0.007 

LEAD 

0.007 

LEAD 

0.007 


ANALYTE (Cu) 

RESULT 

(mg/L) 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.24 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.09 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.22 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.05 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.09 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.06 

COPPER 

0.08 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.24 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.50 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.10 

COPPER 

0.15 

COPPER 

0.07 

COPPER 

0.11 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.16 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.32 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.20 

COPPER 

0.41 

COPPER 

0.00 

COPPER 

0.30 


ZIP CODE 


48503 


48503 


48507 


48503 


48504 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48504 


48505 


48503 


48507 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48507 


48503 


48507 


48507 


48503 


48503 


48504 


48507 


48507 


48503 


48505 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48506 


48504 


48506 


48503 


48504 


48503 


48504 


48503 


48506 


48503 


48504 


48505 


48503 


48503 


48507 














































































































































































































































































RESULT 

ANALYTE (Pb) 

(mg/L) 


0.007 


0.007 


0.007 


0.008 


0.008 


0.008 


0.008 


0.008 


0.008 


0.008 


0.008 


0.008 


0.009 


0.009 


0.009 


0.009 


0.009 


0.010 


0.010 


0.010 


0.010 


0.010 


0.011 


0.011 


0.011 


0.012 


0.012 


0.012 


0.013 


0.013 


0.014 


0.015 


0.015 


HI 


III 


IB 

III 


iffi 

liM 


ANALYTE (Cu) 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


COPPER 


ZIP CODE 


48505 


48507 


48503 


48504 


48503 


48505 


48507 


48503 


48503 


48503 


48504 


48503 


48503 


48507 


48504 


48506 


48503 


48503 


48505 


48507 


48503 


48504 


48503 


48506 


48504 


48507 


48505 


48507 


48503 


48504 


48506 


48503 


48503 


48506 


48506 


48503 


48506 


48503 


48507 


48503 


48532 


48505 


48503 


48503 


48505 


48503 


48504 






























































































































































































































































ANALYTE (Pb) 



ANALYTE (Cu) 


ZIP CODE 


LEAD 


COPPER 


0.07 


48503 


LEAD 


LEAD 


COPPER 


COPPER 


0.09 


0.57 


48507 


48503 


LEAD 


COPPER 


0.27 


LEAD 


LEAD 


COPPER 


COPPER 


0.09 


0.13 


48503 


48503 


LEAD 


COPPER 


0.55 


48503 


LEAD 


COPPER 


0.14 


48507 


LEAD 


COPPER 


0.18 


48503 


| LEAD 

NOTES: 


mem 


COPPER 


0.19 


48503 


1 PPB = 0.001 mg/L 

Lead values exceeding 0.015 mg/L and Copper results exceeding 1.3 mg/L are highlighted in red. 

Sample results of "Not Detected" have been replaced with a numerical value of zero for ease of sorting. 
Samples without a zip code did not have one provided on the accompanying paperwork. 
















































From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Importance: 


Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Monday, November 16, 2015 3:21 PM 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 
(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. 
(DHHS) 

2015-11-16 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 
CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

2015-11-16 Action Steps Week of November 9-13.pdf; 2015-11-16 Flint Drinking 
Water Action Plan Update.pdf; Brownell K-2 STEM Academy Lead Data.pdf; 

Eisenhower Elementary School Lead Data.pdf 

High 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . Action Steps Updated Document for the week of November 9-1 3, 201 5 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

3. Brownelll K-2 STEM Academy Lead Data 

4. Eisenhower Elementary School Lead Data 

As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. 

Morgan, When sending these lead data results to the Governor, you may want to 
consider keeping documents 3 and 4 as separate pdfs for the Governor, in lieu of 
assembling them all together in one pdf, but I’ll make that your call. (Thanks, Mary 
Beth) 

Thank you. 


Dan Wyant 
Director 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of November 9-13 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Meeting held on 10/29/15 to 
discuss time line 

2. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of N RE PA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Meeting scheduled among 
DEQ staff for 1 1 /20/1 5 to 
discuss draft changes 

3. 

Assist Governor’s Flint Water Task 
Force 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 

Draft time line shared with 
T ask Force on 11 /1 3/1 5 

4. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 

Negotiations underway to 
contract with the Genesee 
County Health Department 

5. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


6. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


7. 

Follow up with city of Flint regarding 
corrosion control treatment and their 
plans to address requirements and 
options provided for in 10/30/15 
DEQ letter 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Discussed with Flint’s 
Technical Advisory 
Committee on 11/9/15 


FQIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

November 16, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 





























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

8. 

Follow-up with city of Flint regarding 
installation of corrosion control 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Chemical feed pumps have 
been ordered; currently 
installing feed system piping 
and water booster pumps; 
and city of Flint anticipates 
operation by end of 
November 

9. 

Review Monthly Operation Reports 
(MORs) for Standby Operation of 
Flint Water Treatment Plant with city 
of Flint; draft letter to city of Flint 
documenting standby operation 
requirements 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Letter is drafted and will be 
sent to city of Flint the week 
of 11/9/15 

10. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues; check 
weekly for status update 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Discussed during 1 1/9/1 5 
Flint Technical Advisory 
Committee meeting; Genesee 
County is working on issues 
with Lapeer County Road 
Commission 

11. 

Continue evaluating city of Flint 
service line record status and 
comparison to sampling pool 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Letter provided to city of Flint 
on 1 1 /9/1 5; response due to 
DEQ by 12/30/15 

12. 

Provide DHHS with any available 
cross-reference information 
regarding lead service lines and 
plumbing materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


13. 

Develop draft sampling protocol for 
residential exposure assessment for 

DHHS 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Draft sampling protocol 
shared with DHHS on 
11/10/15 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 November 1 6, 201 5 


























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

14. 

Make progress on drafting a generic 
school sampling guidance document 
for statewide distribution; target 
audience: schools served by 
municipal water 

DEQ and DLARA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Richard Benzie 

Draft document under 
development to make it an 
easy-to-read and follow 
guidance document 

15. 

Attend Flint Technical Advisory 
Committee meeting on 11/9/15 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Mike Prysby 

Attended by Jim Sygo and 
Mike Prysby; presented 
DEQ’s findings of lead 
sampling at Freeman 
Elementary School 

16. 

Draft summary reports for Brownell 
K-2 STEM Academy and 
Eisenhower Elementary School 

DEQ and DLARA 

George Krisztian 
Steve Busch 


17. 

Conduct plumbing assessments at 
Durant-Tuuri-Mott Elementary 
School and Central Kitchen 

DEQ and DLARA 

George Krisztian 
Steve Busch 

DEQ and DLARA completed 
plumbing assessments on 
11/13/15 

18. 

Conduct sampling at Durant-Tuuri- 
Mott Elementary School and Central 
Kitchen 

DEQ and DLARA 

Jim Sygo 
George Krisztian 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ and DLARA completed 
sampling on 11/14/15 

19. 

Evaluate laboratory analysis and 
perform data compilation for 
Doyle/Ryder Elementary School and 
Pierce Elementary School 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 
Steve Busch 
Mike Prysby 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 3 November 1 6, 201 5 

























Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


Key Actions : 

• The Flint Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) meeting was held on November 9. 
The meeting included representatives from the EPA, DEQ, DHFIS, and city of Flint, 
as well as other interested parties. Representatives from the city of Flint indicated 
that they were modifying the sampling protocol instructions to remove a reference 
to pre-flushing of service lines just prior to the beginning of the stagnation period 
for samples being utilized for compliance with the lead and copper rule. An update 
was given regarding a water plan that outlines short-term, intermediate term, and 
long-term goals that the city of Flint is working on in order to get switched over to 
the Karegnondi Water Authority. DEQ staff discussed corrosion control dosages 
and monitoring requirements in detail with the city of Flint and its consultants. 
Representatives from EPA reiterated the need for higher dosages of phosphate in 
order to expedite the formation of a protective layer in the city of Flint’s water 
distribution system. This would be a supplemental addition of phosphate to the 
water coming from Detroit that only contains what is considered to be a 
maintenance dose. 

• The samples for Brownell K-2 STEM Academy and Eisenhower Elementary 
School were analyzed and the data consolidated into spreadsheets. The results 
for both schools parallel the results found at Freeman Elementary School, in that 
the issues appear to be primarily located at the fixture. The percentage of 
locations needing corrective action appears to be greater than what was found at 
Freeman. Work has begun on putting together reports that provide 
recommendations for addressing the issues that were found. Once the reports 
have been completed, they will be shared with the Flint Community Schools 
Superintendent, and then the reports will be published to the Flint water Web 

• The water samples for Doyle/Ryder Elementary School and Pierce Elementary 
School have been analyzed. The results for these schools are currently being 
compiled and evaluated. 

Positions : 

• There are no new positions to report since last week. 

Concerns : 

• A Notice of Intent to Sue has been received from the Natural Resources Defense 
Council and the American Civil Liberties Union of Michigan. The subject reads: 




FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


Notice of Intent to Sue Under the Safe Drinking Water Act, 

42 U.S.C. § 300j-8(b)(1)(a), for Failure to Control Lead in 
Drinking Water in Flint, Michigan, and Failure to Assist 
Michigan Schools with Lead Testing and Remediation 

• A letter was sent by the DEQ on November 9 requesting the city of Flint to 
provide additional information and documentation concerning discrepancies 
between the water service line material reported in the lead/copper reporting 
forms and the water service line material reported in digitized water service index 
cards. The city of Flint must also complete the correlation for all of the remaining 
lead/copper sampling locations that were used since the start of monitoring under 
the lead and copper rule in 1992. Any additional further discrepancies must be 
explained. The city must complete this task by December 30. The existence of 
these discrepancies has been made public by the media. 

Significant Events : 

• A Frequently Asked Questions document has been prepared to address key 
events and decisions surrounding the Flint water situation. This document is 
being presented to the Governor’s Flint Water Task Force to assist in providing 
key information to the investigation. 

• DEQ Director Dan Wyant was interviewed by Rochelle Riley, Detroit Free Press, 
on November 10. Topics of discussion included the results from Freeman 
Elementary School and short-term, intermediate term, and long-term plans to 
address issues with Flint’s water supply, as well as a discussion of corrosion 
controls and how they will be implemented moving forward. 

• DEQ Flint Action Plan Coordinator George Krisztian was interviewed by NBC 
News 25 on November 1 1 . The main topic of conversation was the results from 
Freeman Elementary School. The main point was that the results clearly 
indicated that the issues at the school were fixture-specific and were not deep 
within the plumbing infrastructure. 

Changes from Previous Report : 

• A meeting is scheduled for November 20 among DEQ staff to discuss draft 
legislative changes to Part 54 of the Natural Resources and Environmental 
Protection Act, 1994 PA 451 , as amended. 

• The draft time line was shared with the Governor’s Flint Water Task Force on 
November 1 3. 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 3 


• DEQ staff discussed corrosion control dosages and monitoring requirements in 
more detail with the city of Flint and their consultant during the November 9 Flint 
TAC meeting. Orthophosphate dosage concerns brought to the table by the city 
of Flint’s consultant were addressed by DEQ and EPA staff. 

• DEQ staff followed up with the city of Flint during the November 9 TAC meeting 
regarding installation of corrosion control and confirmed that the chemical feed 
pumps have been ordered and delivery is approximately two weeks out. The 
Flint Water Treatment Plant (WTP) operators are currently installing the feed 
system piping and water booster pumps. The city of Flint anticipates having the 
corrosion control feed system installed and ready for operation by the end of 
November. 

• DEQ staff has drafted a letter that establishes standby operation (test run) 
requirements for the Flint WTP, based upon the city’s previous test run Monthly 
Operation Reports. The draft letter also discusses the potential for Flint to obtain 
a limited supply of raw water directly to the Flint WTP from the Karegnondi Water 
Authority prior to spring 2016 for treatment evaluation. The draft letter will be 
finalized and sent to the city of Flint the week of November 16. 

• DEQ staff discussed with Genesee County during the November 9 TAC meeting 
the most recent stop work orders issued by the Lapeer County Road 
Commission (LCRC). Genesee County is continuing to install the pipeline and is 
working with the LCRC to correct the soil erosion control issues. Genesee 
County has not expressed a concern of this delaying their construction schedule. 

• The DEQ sent a letter to the city of Flint on November 9. The letter requests the 
city of Flint to provide additional information/documentation concerning 
discrepancies between the water service line material reported in the lead/copper 
reporting forms and the water service line material reported in digitized water 
service index cards. The city of Flint must also complete the correlation for all of 
the remaining lead/copper sampling locations that were used since the start of 
monitoring under the lead and copper rule in 1992. Any additional further 
discrepancies must be explained. The city of Flint must complete this task by 
December 30. 

• The draft sampling protocol was shared with DHHS on November 10. 

• DEQ staff, Jim Sygo and Michael Prysby, attended the November 9 Flint TAC 
meeting as described above. Chief Deputy Director Sygo also presented DEQ’s 
findings of the results of the lead sampling conducted at Freeman Elementary 
School. 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 4 


• DEQ and DLARA staff completed plumbing assessments at Durant-Tuuri-Mott 
Elementary School and the central kitchen on November 13. 

• DEQ staff conducted water sampling at Durant-Tuuri-Mott Elementary School 
and the central kitchen on November 14. 

Other Items : 

• As provided by the DHHS, the purchased total water filter/pitcher distribution 
through November 13 is approximately 14,000 units. 

• Attached are the draft spreadsheets that consolidate the lead data for Brownell 
K-2 STEM Academy and Eisenhower Elementary School. 


Prepared by: 


George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Teleohone: 517-284-6719 


November 16, 2015 






SAMPLE NUMBER 

ANALYTE 

| RESULT ] 

Sample Description 

SampleCollector 

Site Code 

LF89583 

Lead 


DW013-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

PI 

LF89584 

Lead 

0.015 

DW013-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

P2 

LF89585 

Lead 

0.008 

DW013-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

F01 

LF89586 

Lead 

0.002 

DW013-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

F02 

LF89587 

Lead 

I1K311 

DW021-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

PI 

LF89588 

Lead 


DW021-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

P2 

LF895S9 

Lead 

0.002 

DW021-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

F01 

LF89590 

Lead 

0,002 

DW021-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

D02 

LF89591 

Lead 

0.008 

CF023-RM #7 

TJD/GLK 

PI 


LF89592 

Lead 

0.012 

CF023-RM #7 

TJD/GLK 

P2 

LF89593 

Lead 

0.000 

CF023-RM #7 

TJD/GLK 

F01 

LF89594 

Lead 

0.000 

CF023-RM #7 

TJD/GLK 

F02 

LF89595 

Lead 



DW014-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

PI 

LF89596 

Lead 

0.003 

DVV014-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD / GLK 

P2 

LF89597 

Lead 

0.002 

DW014-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

F01 

LF8959S 

Lead 

0.001 

DWD14-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

F02 


LF89599 

Lead 

1111 


KC019-RM #4 

TJD/GLK 

PI 

LF89600 

Lead 

0.010 

KC019-RM #4 

TJD/GLK 

P2 

LF89601 

Lead 

0.000 

KC019-RM #4 

TJD/GLK 

F01 

LF89602 

Lead 

0.000 

KC019-RM #4 

TJD/GLK 

F02 

LF 89603 

Lead 

Still 

i 


DW020-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

1 ID /GLK 

PI 

1 F89604 

Lead 

0.015 

D W020-DR IN Kl NG FOUNTAIN 

TJD /GLK 

P2 

1 1-89605 

liiiii 

■B 


DW020 DRINKING IOUN IAIN 



LF89606 

Lead 

0.002 

DW020-DRINKING 1 OUN 1 AIN 

TJD / GLK 

F02 

LF89607 

Lead 

0.012 

DW002-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

PI 

LF89608 

Lead 

0.007 

DW002-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

P2 

LF89609 

Lead 

0.004 

DW002-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

F01 

LF89610 

Lead 

0.001 

DW002-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

TJD/GLK 

F02 

1189611 

Lead 

0.011 

CFQ22-RM #6 

IJD/GIK 

PI 

LF89612 

1 ead 

0.006 

CF022-RM m 

TJD/GLK 

P7 


Lead 

0.002 

CF022-RM #6 

TJD/GLK 

F01 

LF89614 

iiii liiii 

0.000 

CFQ22-RM #6 

TJD/GLK 

F02 

LF89615 

Lead 

0.009 

CF006-RM 26 

TJD/GLK 

PI 

LF89616 

Lead 

0.010 

CF006-RM 26 

TJD/GLK 

P2 

LF89617 

Lead 

0.004 

CF006-RM 26 

TJD/GLK 

F01 

LF89618 

Lead 

0.000 

CF006-RM 26 

BBIiMcTi— 

F02 



LF89620 


LF89621 


LF89622 


LF89623 


LF89624 


LF89625 


LF89626 



0,007 


0.003 


0.011 


0.003 


0.002 


0.000 


CF004 RM 17 


CF004-RM 17 


CF004-RM 17 


CF0Q4-RM 17 


KC016-RM-#! 


KC016-RM-#! 


KC016-RM-#! 


KC016-RM-#! 



LFS9627 


LF89628 


LF89629 


LF89630 


LF89631 


LF89632 



0.013 


0 008 


0.001 


0 000 


0.010 


0.007 


KC017-RM *2 


KC017-RM =2 


KCG17-RM **2 


KC017-RM #2 


CF018-RM #4 


CF018-RM #4 



LF89633 

Lead 

0.000 

CF018-RM #4 


F01 

LF89634 

Lead 

0.000 

CF018-RM #4 


F02 































































































































































































































































































i F89635 


0.007 


IF89636 

Lead 

0,002 

KC015-RM #1 

LF89637 


0.002 

KC015-RM #1: 

LF89638 

1 Lead ji 

0.002 

KC015-RM =1 


LF89639 


LF89640 


LF89641 


LF89642 


LF89643 


LFS9644 


LFS9645 


LF89646 


LF89647 


LF89648 


LF89649 


LF89650 


LF8965 1 


I F89652 


LF89653 


I.FS9654 


LF89655 


LF89656 


LF89657 


LF89658 



LF89663 


LF89664 


LF89665 


LF89666 


1F89667 


L:F896;6;8 


LF89670 


LF89671 



0.000 


0.014 


0.000 


0.000 


0.011 


0.014 


0.014 


0.002 


CF005-RM 17 


CF005-RM 17 


CF005-RM 17 


CF005-RM 17 


DW001-DRINKING 


DWOOl-DRINKING 


DWOOl-DRINKING 


DWOOl-DRINKING 


DW009-DRINKING 


DW009-DRINKING 


DW009-DRINKING 


DW009-DRINKING 


CF010-RM 27 


CF010-RM 27 


CF010-RM 27 


CF010-RIM 27 


CF007-RM 26 


CF007-RM 26 


CF007-RM 26 


CF007-RM 26 


CF003-RM15 


CF003 RM 15 


FOUNTAIN 


FOUNTAIN 


FOUNTAIN 


FOUNTAIN 


FOUNTAIN 


FOUNTAIN 


FOUNTAIN 


FOUNTAIN 


LF89672 

Lead 

0.011 

DW008-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

LF89673 

Lead 

0.004 

DW008-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

LF89674 

Lead 

0.001 

DW008-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 

LF89694 

Lead 

0.010 

CF004 - RM #17 

LF89677 

Lead 

0.002 

CF004 - RM #17 

LF 89702 


0.003 

CFDD4 - RM #17 

LF89700 

Lead 

0.003 

CFQD4 - RM #17 

LF8969 L 

Lead 

0.003 

CFO04 - RM #17 

LF89680 


0.002 

CF004 - RM #17 1 

LF89693 

Lead 

0.002 

CF0D4 - RM #17 7: 

LF89687 

Lead 

0.002 

01004 -RMI #17 

LF89688 

Lead 

0.002 

CF004 - RM #17:1! 

LF89699 

Lead 

0.002 

OFOQ4 - RM #17 : 

LF89695 

Lead 

0.002 

CF012 - 

LF89678 

Lead 

0.000 

CF012 

LF89689 

Lead 

0.000 

CF012 



CF012 


CF012 


CF012 


CF012 


WCQ11-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 


WCG11-DRINKIN6 FOUNTAIN 


WC011-DRINKIN6 FOUNIAI 


WCD11-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 


DW008-DRINKING FOUNTAIN 



F02 


PI 


P2 


F01 


F02 


CA1 


Hill 


CA2 


lllll 


iiii! 


CA5 


mm. 


CA7 


IIII 


CA9 


CB1 


CB10 


CB2 
































































































































































































































LF89683 

LF89676 

LF89686 

LF89696 

LF89692 

LF89681 

LF89679 

iliilii 

LF89GS5 

LF89701 

LFS9GS2 

LFS9G90 

LF89675 

LF89G98 

LF89704 



Lead 

0.000 

CF012 


CB3 

Lead 

0.000 

CF012 

TJD/GLK 

CB4 

Lead 

0.000 

CF012 


CBS 

Lead 

0.000 

CF012 


CB6 

Lead 

0.000 

CF012 


CB7 

Lead 

0.000 

CF012 


CB8 

Lead 

0.000 

CF012 


CB9 

Lead 

0,002 

CF023 


CC1 

Lead 

0.000 

CF023 


CC.10 

Lead 

0.000 

CF023 


CC2 


0.000 

CF023 


CC3 

Lead 

0.000 

CF023 


CC4 

Lead 

0.000 

CF023 


CCS 


0.000 

CF023 



Lead 

0.000 

CFD23 


CC7 









































































liiiiiiiwiijSiR 


LF89705 


LF89706 


LF89707 


LF89708 


LF89709 


LFS9710 


LF89711 


LF89712 


LF89713 


LF89714 


LF89715 


LF89716 


LF89717 


LF89718 


LF89719 


LF 89/20 


LF89721 


LF89722 


LF89723 


LF89724 


LF89725 


LF89726 


LF89727 


If 89 738 


LF89729 


LF89730 


LF89731 


LF89732 


LFS9734 


LF 8973b i 


LF89736 


LF89737 


LF89738 


LF89739 


LF89740 


1189/41 


LF89742 


llllllll 


in mm i 


LF89745 


LF89746 


LF89747 


LF89748 


119119 ; 


iliilli! 


1111111 ! 


LF89752 


LF89753 


LF89754 


LF89755 


LF89756 


ANALYTE 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


I ead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Load 


Load 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


Lead 


RESULT 



0.002 


0.001 


0 009 


0.009 


0;ooo 


0.000 i 


0.012 


0.009 


0.001 


0.000 


0.013 


0 002 


0.000 


0.000 



0.003 


0.002 



0.002 


0 000 


0.012 


0.012 


0.003 


0.002 


0.009 j 


mm 


0.000 


0 000 


0.013 


0.004 


0.002 


0.001 


0 007 


0.002 


0 001 


0.014 


0.011 


0.001 


0.001 


0 011 


mm 


0 002 


0.000 



Sarrple Description 


01CF014 RM104 


01CF014 RM104 


01CF014 RM104 


01CF014 RM 104 


02CF021 RM201 


02CF021 RM201 


02CF021 RM201 


02CF021 RM2Q1 


02DW023 RM202 


02DW023 RM202 


02DW023 RM202 


02DW023 RM202 


01CF010RM102 


01CF010RM102 


01CF010RM102 


01CF01QRM102 


01DW013 RM104 


01DW013 RM104 


01DW013 RM104 


01DW013 - RM104 


02DW020 RM2Q1 


02DW020 RM201 


02DWO2O RM2D1 


02DW020 RM201 


01CF012 RM103 


01CF012 RM103 


01CF012 RM103 


01CF012 RM103 


01DW009 RM102 


01DW009 RM102 


01DW009 RM102 


O1DWO09 RM102 


01DW011 RM103 


01DW0I1 RM103 


01DW011 RM103 


01DW011 RM103 


02CF022 RM202 


O2CF022 - RM202 


02CFO22- RM202 


02CF022 - RM202 


01CF008 RM101 


01CF008 - RM101 


01CF008 RM101 


01CF008 - RM101 


01DW007 RfVlOl 


010W007 REV 101 


01DW007 RPVIOI 


01DW007 REV 101 


01DW001 GYM 


01DW001 GYM 


01DW001 GYM 


01DW001 GYM 


SampleCol lector 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/LOIS GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/I. GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


PRYSBY M/I. GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/I. GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/1 GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY 


ii^naa 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


II 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 




M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


II— I 

iiMikvmyigdMiMM 




































































































































































































































































































LF89757 


LF8975S 


IIP! 


1111® 


LF89761 


LF89762 


LF89763 


LF89764 


lllllli 


ilillli 


LFS9767 


LF89768 


LF89769 


LF89770 


LF89771 


LF89772 


lllllli 


1FS9774: 


LF89775 


LF89776 


LF89777 


LF89778 


LF89779 


LF89780 



0 010 


0.001 


10021 


0.013 


0.003 


0.002 


0.001 


0.014 


0.003 


0 001 


0.000 


0.003 


0.002 


0.003 


0.000 


0 000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.004 


0.004 


0.001 


0.000 


01CF004 ROIOIV' 109 


01CF004 ROOM 109 


01CF004 RO0M109 


01CF004 ROOM 109 


01DW003 ROOM109 


01DW003 ROOM109 


01DW003 ROOM109 


01DW003 ROOM109 


01CF006 CLINIC 


01CF006 CLINIC 


01CF006 CLINIC 


01CF006 CLINIC 


04KC043 UNIT2 


04KC043 UNIT2 


04KC043 UNIT 2 


04KC043-UNIT 2 


03DW039 - UNIT 1 


03DW039 - UNIT 1 


03DW039 - UNIT 1 


03DW039 - UNIT 1 


01KC005 - COMMUNITY 


01KC005 COMMUNITY 


01KC005 COMMUNITY 


01KC005 COMMUNITY 


pill 

ISS 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 




M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


iMaaaBMBi 

inaM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 




M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 




M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 




M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


miA'm UKJMhm 



LF897S4 

Lead 

0.003 

LF89785 

Lead 

0.012 

LF89786 

Lead 

0.004 

LF89787 

Lead 

0.000 

LF89788 

Lead 

0.000 

LF89789 

i 

0.005 

LF89790 


0.001 

LF89791 

Lead j 

0.000 


i 

0.000 

LF89793 

Lead 

0.012 

LF89794 

Lead 

0.002 

LF89795 

Lead 

0.001 

LF89796 

Lead 

0.000 

LF89797 

Lead 

0.011 

LE89798 

Lead 

0.003 

LF89799 


0.001 

LF89800 


0.000 

LF89801 

Lead 

0.007 

LF89802 

Lead 


LF89803 

Lead 

0.005 

LF89804 

Lead 

0.001 




03KC041- UNIT 1 


03KC041 - UNIT1 


03KC041-UNIT1 


03KC041 - UNIT1 


03DW38~UN[T1 


03DW038 - UNIT 1 


030W038 - UNIT 1 


03DW038 UNIT1 


03KC040 UNIT 1 


03KC040 UNIT1 


03KC040 UNIT 1 


03KC040 UNIT1 


04KC044 - UNIT 2 


04KC044-UNIT 2 


04KC044 - UNIT 2 


04KC044 UNIT2 


02CF036 RM209 


02CF036 RM209 


02CF036 RM209 


02CF036 RM209 


02DW035 RM208 


MIKE PRYSBY/LOIS 


lag^BSH 

I e 


M PRYSBY/1 GRAHAM 


irmraraiwiTiiH 


MIKE PRYSBY/ LOIS 


MIKE PRYSBY/LOIS 


MIKE PRYSBY 




M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


iiMikvmyiisraararci 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 




LF89809 


020W035 RM20S 


P 2 

02DW035 RM208 

wmmmwmwmi 

F01 

020W03S RM208 


F02 

02CF034 RM208 


PI 











































































































































































































































LF89810 


LF89811 


LF89812 


illllii 


1189814 


LF89815 


LF89816 


LF89817 


LF89818 


LF89819 


LF89820 


LF89821 


LFS9822 


8189823 


IF89824 


LF89825 


LF89826 


LF89827 


LF89828 


LF89829 


IF 89830 


LF89831 


LF89832 


LF89833 


LF89834 


LF89835 


LF89836 




1 11981 1 


LF89848 


LF89849 


LF89850 


LF89851 


LF89852 


LF89853 


LF89854 


8189111 ! 


iisiiii : 


LF89857 


LF89858 


LF89859 


LF89860 


8F89SS1 : 


11898811 


0.005 


0.001 


0.008 


0.002 


0.002 


0.002 


0 013 


0.004 


0.005 


0 001 


0.008 


0.002 


0.001 


0 014 


0 004 


0 000 


0 001 


0.012 


0.005 


0.000 


0.000 


0 012 


0.009 


mm 


0 001 


0.010 


0.002 


0.001 


0.000 


0 009 


0.006 


02CF034 RM208 


02CF034 RM208 

M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 

02CF034 RM 208 

M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 

02DW033 RM207 


02DW033 RM207 


02DW033 RM207 

SlHEllB! 

02DW033 RM207 
m Krm q rmi ns 

M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 

TwT5^voW7i1^TiJrO 

01KC019 RM108 

mmmsiwim 

01KC019 RM108 

M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 

01KC019 RM108 


02CF032 RM207 

M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 

02CF032 RM207 


02CF032 RM207 

M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 

02CF032 RM207 

M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 

02DW037 RM209 


02DW037 RM209 

1 MMWMMi 

02DW037 RM209 

M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 

02DW037 RM209 

M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 

02DW025 RM203 

WMMMMmmmi 

02DW025 RM203 

wmMMMMMmm 

02DW025 RM203 

nSBIiiiiKi 

02DW025 RM203 

PRYSBY M/L GRAHAM 1 

02DW027 RM204 


02DW027 RM204 

liifflMIMM 

02DW027 RM204 

M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 

02DW027 RM204 

IMil;Vri=y/Hcl;H:M 

02CF026 ~ 4 M 204 


02CF026 RM204 


02CF026 RM 204 





LF89841 

Lead 


02DW031 RM206 

M PRYSBY/ L GRAHAM 

pi 

LF89842 

Lead 

0.007 

02DW031 RM206 

iiaiaai 

P2 

LF89843 

Lead 

0.001 

02DW031 RM206 

M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 

F01 

LF89844 

Lead 

0.000 

02DW031 RM206 


F02 

i 1 

Lead 


02DW029 RM205 


PI 


0.014 

020W029 RM205 


ill 

0.011 

02DW029 RM205 

lima HEBSBH 

F 01 


02DW029 RM205 


02CF028 RM205 


02CF028 RM205 


02CF028 RM205 


02CF028 RM205 


07DW017 REV/' 107 


010W017 RM107 


01DW017 RM107 


010 W 017 wmm 


01DW015 RM106 


01DW015 RM106 


01DW015 RM106 


01DW015 RM106 


01CF018 RM107 


01CF01S RIV107 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


nyjd;Vtf:y#iicityjsrjai 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


immwMmmm 

umaaaaaiBa^m 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


wmm 
















































































































































































































































LF89S63 


LF89864 


LF89865 


LF89866 


LF89867 


LF89868 


LF89869 


LF89870 


mill i 


11111111 


LF89873 


LF89874 


LF89875 


LF89876 


llilill! 


IF 898 78 


l F898 79 


LFS9880 


mill i 


■iiiii 


11898831 


IIIIIIII 


9885 


LF89887 


LF89888 


LF89889 


LF89890 


LF89891 


LF89892 


LF89893 


LF89894 


LF89895 


LF89896 


I F89897 


0.001 


0 000 


0.010 


0.008 


0.002 


0.000 


0.004 j 


Mill 


0.014 


0.015 


0.006 


0.002 


0.001 


0 000 


0.000 


0.002 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.000 


0.001 


0.001 


0.000 


0.000 


0.003 


0.000 


01CF01S R IV' 107 


01CF07S RM107 


02CF030 RM206 


02CF030 RM206 


02CF030 RM206 


02CF030 RM206 


01CF016 - RM106 


01CF016- RM106 


01CF016 - RM106 


01CF016 - RM106 


02CF024 RM203 


02CF024 RM203 


02CF024 RM203 


02CF024 RM203 


03KC040 - UNIT 1 


03KC040 UNIT 1 


03KC040 UNIT 1 


04KC044 UNIT 2 


04KC044 UNIT 2 


04KC044 UNIT 2 


04KC044 UNIT 2 


04KC044 UNIT 2 


04KC044 UNIT 2 


04KC044 UNIT 2 


04KC044 UNIT 2 


04KC044 UNIT 2 


04KC044 UNIT 2 


01CF004 - RM 109 


01CF004 - RM 109 


01CF0 




M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


IIMaHWaWMiMSMM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


PRYSBY M/L GRAHAM 




M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


iwat an 

iwaiMaiMiwM 

MimstmMtmihy.mi 


PRYSBY M/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


0.000 

03KC040 - UNIT 1 


0.000 

03KC040 - UNIT 1 

HB19 

0.000 

03KC040 - UNIT 1 


0.000 

03KC04G - UNIT 1 

HMHSi 

0.000 

03KC040 - UNIT 1 


0.000 

03KC040 - UNIT 1 

iHiilESlii 

0.000 

03KC040 UNIT 1 

BlllllSilll 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 




M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 



Him 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 




M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 




LF89900 


0 000 

01CF004 RM 109 

LF89901 

Lead 

0.000 

01CF004 RM 109 

LF89902 

Lead 

0.000 

01CF004 RM 109 

1 F 89903 

Lead 

0.000 

01CF004 RM 109 

LF89904 

Lead 

0.000 

01CF004 RM 109 

LF89905 


0.000 

01CF004 RM 109 

LF 89906 


0.000 

01CF004 R 109 

LF89907 

Lead 

0.002 

oiCFOlO RM 102 

LF89908 

Lead 

0.000 

01CF010 RM 102 

LF89909 

Lead 

0.000 

01CF010 RM 102 

LF89910 

Lead 

0.000 

01CF010 RM 102 

LF89911 

Lead 

0.000 

01CF010 RM 102 

LF89912 

Lead 

0.000 

01CF010 RM 102 

LF89913 

Lead 

0.000 

01CF010 RM 102 

LF89914 

Lead 

0.000 

01CF010 RM 102 

LF89915 

Lead 

0.000 

01CF010 RM 102 





M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


IMMiVidiV/igdiMSFiMI 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 




M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 


MMaEMSI 

EEMHEMBI 






























































































































































































































































LF89916 

Lead 

0.000 

01CF010 RM 102 


LF89917 

Lead 

[oiOOSllllllllllllllli: 

02CF036 RM 209 

M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 

LF 89918 


lOiOOllllllllllllllll:! 

02CF036 - RM 209 


LF89919 

Lead 

lo.DOl 

02CF036 - RM 209 


LF89920 


0.001 

02CF036 RM 209 


LF89921 

aooo 

02CF036 RM 209 

IBHBBB 

LF 89922 

mm 

02CF036 RM 209 

M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 

l F89923 

0.000 

02CF036 RM 209 


LF89924 

Lead 

0.000 

02CF036 RM 209 

WMmmmmwm 


IlSiilSI 


0.000 


02CF036 RM 209 


tmmamm 


M PRYSBY/L GRAHAM 















































From: Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, November 23, 2015 3:10 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 

(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. 

(DHHS) 

Subject: 2015-11-23 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 

CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 18-Point Partnering Plan ll-23-15.pdf; 2015-11-23 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan 

Update.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1. 18-Point Partnering Plan 

2. Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



Department of Environmental Quality 
18-Point Partnering Plan 


1. After Action Plan Frequently Asked Questions will be ready by noon on 
November 16, 2015 

• First version complete - updated as needed 

2. School test data 

• School reports to be expedited 

• Steve Busch creates summary reports 

• George Krisztian creates summary spreadsheets 

3. Blood exposure 

• DHHS is lead on providing data 

4. Meeting with Mayor Karen Weaver 

• Harvey Hollins lead - Dan Wyant, Jim Sygo, and George Krisztian to 
attend 

5. Messaging our Partnering Plan 

• Provide ongoing public updates regarding Governor’s 1 0-point plan 

• Continue emphasis on the availability of free testing for Flint residents 

• DEQ’s Office of Environmental Assistance to direct the public to the Flint 
water Web site: www. roi .gov/ffintwater 

6. Sampling Protocol 

• Establish alignment with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
Region 5, on sampling protocol 

7. Lead service line replacement 

• Expand the Revolving Loan Fund directed at lead service line replacement 

• Amy Epkey, Maggie Pallone, and Sonya Butler 



DEQ 18-Point Partnering Plan 
Page 2 


8. Partner with EPA 

• Dan Wyant — > Susan Hedman 

• Jim Sygo — > Bob Kaplan 

• Mike Prysby and Steve Busch — > Darren Lytle and Mike Schock 

• George Krisztian — >Tom Burke 

• DEQ’s Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance (ODWMA) 
staff — >EPA, Region 5, staff (Jennifer Crooks and Tom Poy) 

9. Meet with Charles Stewart Mott Foundation to discuss Lead Service Line 
Identification Study 

10. Lead Education Program 

• DHHS is the lead on Lead Education Program 

1 1 . Moving Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) forward 

• Proactive meetings with KWA 

12. Participate actively with Flint Technical Advisory Council 

13. Utilize Joan Rose and Michigan State University water expertise 

14. Public outreach 

• Flint Mayor Karen Weaver 

• Genesee County Health Department 

• Drs. Lawrence Reynolds, Eden Wells, and Matthew Davis 

• Ministers 

• Land Bank 

• Legislators 

• Citizens 

15. Outreach to schools 

• EPA guidance on testing 

• Work with State Superintendent Brian Whiston 

• ODWMA staff to work on literature 

16. Make recommendations to EPA about Lead and Copper Rule 

17. Compliance Communication letter sent on November 9, 2015 

• Wait until after December 30, 2015 



DEQ 18-Point Partnering Plan 
Page 3 


18. Enhance coordination with health officials regarding personal health 
notifications of drinking water issues 



Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


Key Actions : 

• An 1 8-Point Partnering Plan was developed to guide DEQ staff on the Flint water 
issue. The document focuses on areas of concern and identifies key 
partnerships. The issues in the Partnering Plan address short-term, intermediate 
term, and long-terms goals. This document will be reviewed at least weekly, and 
actions by DEQ staff with respect to the Partnering Plan will be documented. 

The Partnering Plan has become a standing agenda item and a central focus for 
the internal action plan meetings. 

• On November 20 the weekly meeting was held at Flint between DEQ staff and 
city of Flint officials. Mayor Karen Weaver was present at the meeting. This was 
Mayor Weaver’s first time in attendance at the weekly meeting. After 
introductions were made, Mayor Weaver was given an overview of the data from 
the free homeowner’s testing. Mayor Weaver was informed that the samples 
were from any Flint resident who wished to have their water tested and, as such, 
were not necessarily representative of the site selection criteria as specified in 
the lead and copper rule, but with that said, the results were encouraging. Mayor 
Weaver was informed that over 3/4 of the samples had results of 5 parts per 
billion (ppb) or less and that approximately 92 percent of the sample results were 
at 15 ppb or less. It was also stressed to Mayor Weaver that, although the 
results were encouraging, there were also pockets of concern where the lead 
levels in the drinking water were significantly above 15 ppb. 

There was also discussion about making sure that water sample results were 
kept in context. In order for an individual to be sure with respect to their 
exposure to lead, they should have their blood tested. Individuals with an 
elevated blood level (EBL) would then be encouraged to have an EBL 
investigation done to evaluate all potential exposure pathways. There was then 
discussion as to what the EBL investigation entailed and how the water testing 
was being incorporated into the EBL. 

The meeting ended with an invitation by the DEQ to Mayor Weaver to come tour 
the DEQ’s Laboratory to see first-hand how samples were analyzed. Mayor 
Weaver indicated that she would be very interested in a tour and that a date 
would be set up. 

Positions : 

• There are no new positions to report since last week. 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


Concerns : 

• There are no new concerns to report since last week. 

Significant Events : 

• A Frequently Asked Questions document was provided to the Governor’s Flint 
Water Task Force (Task Force) on November 1 6. DEQ staff subsequently met 
with the Task Force on November 18. 

Changes from Previous Report : 

• DEQ staff provided comments on the final draft of the DHFIS protocol for EBL 
investigations. The sampling protocol will utilize 14 drinking water samples that 
will be used to identify potential sources of exposure to lead located in the 
plumbing system of residential dwellings. 

• DEQ staff provided comment on the draft sampling protocol that the city of Flint is 
proposing to use for compliance monitoring for the lead and copper rule. This 
document has been forwarded to staff at the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) for additional comment. 

• On November 1 9 DEQ staff contacted EPA staff via e-mail regarding a request 
by the city of Flint for guidance on a corrosion control treatment evaluation for 
Karegnondi Water Authority source water use at the Flint Water Treatment Plant. 
A meeting has been scheduled for December 1 1 to discuss the issue with all 
parties. 

• DEQ and DLARA staff conducted a plumbing assessment of Neithercut 
Elementary School in Flint on November 20. 

• DEQ and DLARA staff conducted school sampling at Neithercut Elementary 
School in Flint on Saturday, November 21 . 

• A draft report for Eisenhower Elementary School was completed and is awaiting 
final publishing and will then be posted to the Flint water Web site: 

www. m i . gov/'fli n twater . 

• Draft reports for Brownell K-2 STEM Academy and Pierce Elementary Schools 
are in progress and near completion. 

• DEQ staff has been in meetings with the Office of the Auditor General audit team 
and have provided information and documentation as requested. 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 3 


Other Item : 

• Attached is the 18-point Partnering Plan that will guide the efforts of the DEQ 
regarding the Flint water issue. 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


November 23, 2015 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Importance: 


Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Monday, November 30, 2015 3:06 PM 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 
(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. 
(DHHS) 

2015-11-30 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 
CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

2015-11-30 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update.pdf; 11-23-2015 Flint Drinking 
Water Events Timeline.pdf; EisenhowerElementary_Report.pdf; 18-Point Partnering 
Plan ll-23-15.pdf 

High 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

• Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

• Revised Flint Drinking Water Events Timeline 

• Eisenhower Elementary School report 

• 18-Point Partnering Plan dated November 23, 2015 (we sent this last week but sending again as a 
reminder) 

As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. I have also added Richard Baird to this weekly email. 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


Key Actions : 

Due to the Thanksgiving holiday, this week’s report is abbreviated. 

Positions : 

There are no new positions to report since last week. 

Concerns : 

There are no new concerns to report since last week. 

Significant Events : 

There are no significant events to report since last week. 

Changes from Previous Report : 

• The Flint Drinking Water Events Timeline has been revised. The header and 
footer were updated, and acronyms were generally removed. Permit numbers 
have been deleted, and dates were filled in to the extent possible. The most 
significant change is the December 31 , 2014, item regarding end of the 1 st 
monitoring period. This was rewritten to be consistent with the June 30, 2015, 
end of the 2nd monitoring period item. The compliance letter reporting the 
results was added on March 30, 2015. 

• School sampling was suspended due to the holiday and is scheduled to continue 
on Saturday, December 5, 2015. 

• The report for Eisenhower Elementary School was completed, has gone through 
final publishing, and will be posted to the Flint water Web site: 

www. m L g ov/f I j ntwate r . 

• There are now a total of four schools in Flint that are not part of the Flint 
Community Schools that have requested plumbing assessments and sampling of 
their facilities. These facilities will be evaluated once the Flint school system 
evaluation has been completed. The four facilities include: Eagle’s Nest 
Academy, Powers Catholic High School, International Academy of Flint, and 

St. Paul Lutheran School. It is anticipated that these facilities will be evaluated 
beginning sometime in January 2016. 






FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


• The internal after action group met on November 24, 2015, to discuss the newly- 
created 18-Point Partnering Plan. Each point was reviewed, and members were 
instructed to use the document as a plan moving forward. The Partnering Plan is 
meant to be a living document and will be revised as needed. 

Other Items : 

• Attached is the revised Flint Drinking Water Events Timeline. 

• Attached is the Eisenhower Elementary School report. 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6 719 

November 30, 2015 



MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 
FLINT DRINKING WATER EVENTS TIMELINE 


Date 

Event 

Attachment 

Pre-1967 

Flint Water Treatment Plant in operation 
using Flint River for drinking water 

1 

Post-1967 

Flint switched to Detroit Water and 
Sewerage Department for drinking water 

None 

January 2006 

Discussions regarding Karegnondi 
Water Authority, Preliminary Long-Term 
Water Supply for Genesee County 

2 

June 25, 2009 
September 2009 

Lake Huron Water Supply Study 
Karegnondi Water Authority 
Executive Summary and 
Preliminary Engineering Report 

3 

March 2013 

Analysis of the Flint River as a 
Permanent Water Supply for the City of 
Flint, Prepared for: City of Flint dated 
July 2011 

4 

April 2013 

Flint notifies Detroit Water and 
Sewerage Department of contract 
discontinuation and joins the 
Karegnondi Water Authority 

5 

April 2013 

Detroit Water and Sewerage Department 
sets termination of Flint water service 
contract to April 17, 2014 

6 

June 2013 

Flint notifies the Department of 
Environmental Quality of intent to 
operate Flint Water Treatment Plant full 
time using Flint River for drinking water 

7 

April 2014 

The Michigan Department of 
Environmental Quality issues Flint 
Water Treatment Plant construction 
permits for full time operation 
enhancements W141025 and W141026 

9 

May 2014 

Flint stops purchasing Detroit Water and 
Sewerage Department water. Starts 
using the City of Flint Water Treatment 
Plant and Flint River for drinking water 

10 

August 2014 

Flint E. coli bacteria violation, Localized 
System Boil Water Advisory 

11 

September 2014 

Disinfection Byproducts compliance 
communication; the Michigan 
Department of Environmental Quality 
requests preemptive Operational 
Evaluation 

12 

September 2014 

Flint Total Coliform Bacteria violation, 
Localized System Boil Water Advisory 

13 


Page 1 


November 23, 2015 































MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 
FLINT DRINKING WATER EVENTS TIMELINE 


Date 

Event 

Attachment 

October 2014 

General Motors announces decision to 
stop using Flint River as source for 
production water 

14 


December 2014 

Disinfection Byproducts quarterly 
violation begins 

15 

December 31, 2015 

1st 6-month round of lead and copper 
monitoring ends. Results due from Flint 
to Michigan Department of 
Environmental Quality on January 10, 
2015 

None 

January 21, 2015 

City of Flint Public Meeting regarding 
disinfection byproducts and bacteria 

17 

February 26, 2015 

E-mail from United States 
Environmental Protection Agency to 
Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality regarding elevated lead sample 

18 

February 27, 2015 

E-mail from United States 
Environmental Protection Agency to 
Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality inquiring about Optimized 
Corrosion Control Treatment 

19 

February 27, 2015 

Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality response to United States 
Environmental Protection Agency email 
with statement regarding optimized 
corrosion control program 

20 

March 5, 2015 

2nd Disinfection Byproducts quarterly 
violation notice 

21 

March 30, 2015 

Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality notifies Flint of Lead/Copper 
Monitoring Results. 

16 

April 3, 2015 

Long Term 2 Enhanced Surface Water 
Treatment Rule Letter 

22 

April 6, 2015 

Flint proposes installation of Granular 
Activated Carbon Filter media to reduce 
disinfection byproducts 

23 

April 23, 2015 

United States Environmental Protection 
Agency e-mail to Michigan Department 
of Environmental Quality regarding 
corrosion control treatment 

24 

April 24, 2015 
May 1, 2015 

Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality responds to United States 
Environmental Protection Agency 
regarding corrosion control treatment 

25 


Page 2 


November 23, 2015 


































MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 
FLINT DRINKING WATER EVENTS TIMELINE 


Date 

Event 

Attachment 

April 27, 2015 

United States Environmental Protection 
Agency provided bottles to 212 
Browning for lead/copper analyses 

26 

May 6, 2015 

Lead service line replaced at 212 
Browning. United States Environmental 
Protection Agency on-site 

27 

May 28, 2015 

Internal United States Environmental 
Protection Agency e-mail regarding 
results at 212 Browning 

29 

June 9, 2015 

3rd Disinfection Byproducts quarterly 
violation notice 

30 

June 10, 2015 

Semi-Annual Conference call with 
United States Environmental Protection 
Agency 

31 

June 30, 2015 

E-mail from United States 
Environmental Protection Agency 
scheduling conference call on July 21, 
2015 regarding elevated lead result and 
concerns regarding corrosion control 

32 

June 30, 2015 

2nd 6-month round of lead and copper 
monitoring ends. Results due from Flint 
to Michigan Department of 
Environmental Quality on July 10, 2015 

None 

July 9, 2015 

Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality informed that United States 
Environmental Protection Agency draft 
internal memo is on ACLU website 

33 

July 14, 2015 

Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality issues construction permit to 
Flint for Granular Activated Carbon filter 
media W151055 

34 

July 21, 2015 

Conference call with United States 
Environmental Protection Agency (Lead 
and Copper Rule implementation and 
Flint) during which it informs Michigan 
Department of Environmental Quality its 
interpretation of Lead and Copper Rule 

35 

July 24, 2015 

Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality e-mail and draft letter 90th 
percentile lead determination = 11 parts 
per billion and City of Flint requirement 
to add corrosion control treatment 

36 


Page 3 


November 23, 2015 

























MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 
FLINT DRINKING WATER EVENTS TIMELINE 


Date 

Event 

Attachment 

July 28, 2015 

Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality received blood lead level 
information from Michigan Department 
of Health and Human Services 
indicating that results since the switch 
to the Flint River are consistent with 
past years seasonal variations 

37 

August 4, 2015 

Meeting with city representatives at 
Governor’s office 

38 

August 17, 2015 

Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality notifies Flint of lead/copper 
monitoring results and requires City to 
install corrosion control treatment 

39 

August 23, 2015 

Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality notified by an external party that 
a water quality study was about to begin 
in Flint 

40 

September 2, 2015 

Disinfection Byproducts return to 
compliance 

43 

September 11, 2015 

United States Environmental Protection 
Agency e-mail confirming that Michigan 
Department of Environmental Quality 
was never sent the draft June 24, 2015 
memo 

44 

September 21, 2015 

Meeting with Congressional 
representatives, legislators, United 
States Environmental Protection Agency 
and Michigan Department of 
Environmental Quality to discuss issues 
with water quality in Flint 

45 

September 22, 2015 

Meeting/Conference call with Michigan 
Department of Health and Human 
Services, Genesee County Health 
Department, and Michigan Department 
of Environmental Quality to discuss lead 
education/outreach 

46 

September 24, 2015 

Hurley Children’s Hospital data reveals 
elevated blood lead levels in Flint 
children 

47 

September 24, 2015 

Michigan Department of Health and 
Human Services response affirms State 
blood lead level data is more 
comprehensive than Hurley Hospital 
data 

None 


Page 4 


November 23, 2015 

























MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 
FLINT DRINKING WATER EVENTS TIMELINE 


Date 

Event 

Attachment 

September 25, 2015 

Flint issues Lead Advisory regarding 
drinking water 

48 

October 1, 2015 

State Chief Medical Officer confirms 
Hurley blood lead level data 

None 

October 1, 2015 

Genesee County Health Department 
issues “Do Not Drink” Advisory 

49 

October 2, 2015 

Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality and Michigan Department of 
Health and Human Services press 
conference. Governor’s Flint Action 
Plan announced. 

50 

October 2, 2015 

Genesee County Health Department 
school screening water samples 
collected for lead analysis 

51 

October 8, 2015 

Governor Press Conference: Flint to 
reconnect to Great Lakes Water 
Authority/Detroit Water and Sewerage 
Department 

52 

October 15, 2015 

State Legislature authorizes a $9 million 
to assist the City of Flint to pay for the 
return to the Detroit water system and to 
fund staff at schools to gauge lead 
exposure 

None 

October 16, 2015 

First weekly coordination meeting held 
between the City of Flint and state 
agencies 

None 

October 16, 2015 

Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality meets with Flint Schools 
Superintendent and Genesee County 
Health Department 

None 

October 16, 2015 

Flint switches back to Detroit Water and 
Sewerage Department for water 

53 

October 21, 2015 

Governor Snyder announces formation 
of Flint Water Task Force to complete an 
After-Action Review 

None 

October 28, 2015 

Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality issues construction permit for 
additional corrosion control treatment 
W151104 

54 

October 30, 2015 

Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality letter to Flint regarding 
corrosion control treatment operation 

55 


Page 5 


November 23, 2015 



























MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 
FLINT DRINKING WATER EVENTS TIMELINE 


Date 

Event 

Attachment 

November 3, 2015 

United States Environmental Protection 
Agency Memorandum regarding “Lead 
and Copper Rule Requirements for 
Optimal Corrosion Control Treatment for 
Large Drinking Water Systems” 

56 

November 4, 2015 

United States Environmental Protection 
Agency Memorandum regarding 
“Transmittal of Final Report - High Lead 
at Three Residences in Flint, Michigan” 

57 

Mid-Late 2016 

Planned connection to Karegnondi 
Water Authority (Lake Huron water to 
Flint Water Treatment Plant) 

None 


Page 6 


November 23, 2015 










J. V -S' § 

§ Ills! 

\«y ^ 


et 


5a 




ng Assessment Recom mersdatioris 


v O W ? 









On Friday, October 30, 2015, the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs (DLARA) and the Department 
of Environmental Quality (DE.Q) conducted an assessment of Eisenhower Elementary School's plumbing system 
to gain a comprehensive understanding of how water moves through the building and what types of plumbing 
materials are used. Two outlet buildings in addition to the main school building were included in the assessment. 
The assessment identified the following potential sources of lead leaching into drinking water: 

* Lead solder joints on copper piping 

® Brass valves and brass fittings 

« Brass components in fixtures 

* Galvanized piping 

The assessment also identified 43 faucets or fountains that provide water for drinking, cooking, and/or food 
preparation, 37 faucets/fountains in the main school building, four faucets/fountains in out building unit. 1, and 
two faucets/fountains in out building unit 2. The team developed a sequence for sampling the faucets/fountains in 
each building based on how the water travels through each building. 

On Saturday, October 31, 2015, the DEQ and the DLARA completed sampling of the 37 faucets/fountains in the 
main school building, the four faucets/fountains in out building unit 1, and the two faucets/fountains in out building 
unit 2, each in the order determined by the plumbing assessment from the previous day, following a stagnation 
period of over 12 hours. At each of the 43 faucets/fountains identified, staff collected four samples. Two initial, 
125-mililiter samples (PI and P2), were collected immediately after turning on the tap. The water was then flushed 
for 30 seconds and a third, 125-miiiliter sample (FOl) was collected. Finally, the water was flushed for another 
two minutes, and the fourth 125-mililiter sample (FG2) was collected. These samples were used to determine the 
impact of any lead sources in and around each specific faucet/fountain and its connecting plumbing. 

The DEQ and the DLARA then completed consecutive sampling at three of the 37 faucets/fountains in the main 
school building, one of the four faucets/fountains in out building unit. 1, and one of the two faucets/fountains in 
out building unit 2, five sites in total. This consecutive sampling was used to determine the impact of any lead 
sources located deep in the supply plumbing at each of these buildings. The three sites in the main school building 
included one site near the building service line, one site near the plumbing mid-point, and one site at the far end of 
the plumbing system. At each of these five sites, staff collected 10, 1-liter samples. The 10 samples were collected 
immediately after turning on the tap, and consecutively, without, any flushing time in between. 


W 


RVICE INFORMATION 


A four-inch diameter cast iron water service line enters the main school building in the boiler room northwest 
wall located in the west corner of the building. Piping in the boiler room immediately transitions into galvanized 
metal piping for cold water lines. Three separate galvanized cold water supply lines exit the boiler room. One 
in the north corner serves a single hose bib directly outside the boiler room. A second line exits the southeast 
wall and serves the adjacent janitors closet and dressing room bathrooms. The third line exits the boiler room 
on the northeast side through a utility tunnel that runs below the school hallways and serves all rooms In the 
main school building. This supply line then runs between the first and second floors on the southeast end of 


l 


the building. Copper piping with lead solder joints branches off of the galvanized supply Sine for cold water 
supply to each room. Hot water is distributed in continuous loops that feed from and return to a central water 
heater in the boiler room. Hot water piping material, where exposed, was copper piping with lead solder joints. 
Brass valves were seen throughout the building. 

Out building unit 1 has a separate customer service line from the City water main constructed using copper 
piping material. The service line comes out of the ground beneath the building and within the building is 
copper pipe with iead free solder joints. 

Out building unit 2 has a separate customer service line from the City water main constructed using copper 
piping material. The service line comes out of the ground beneath the building and within the building is 
copper pipe with iead free solder joints. 


WitH I 1 ft rf* tr* r ¥ li & si 1 B Billion 


The DEO recommends school facilities take action if samples from any drinking water outlets show lead levels 
greater than 15 parts per billion. Based on the sampling conducted at 43 faucets/fountains on October 31, 
2015, the following 18 drinking water outlets had lead water level results greater than 15 parts per billion. 
Each of these 18 outlets is listed below with its sample results, inciudinga description of the potential source(s) 
of lead, and recommended actions for the school to take. 


Outlet: Bubbler Drinking Fountain (01DW001) 

Location: West corner, Gymnasium Multipurpose Room 
Results: Pl=32 parts per billion, P2=6 parts per billion 

F01=5 parts per billion, F02=3 parts per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the 
bubbler itself. This bubbler fixture is made of chrome plated brass and is 
believed to have a brass valve. The connection piping with the unit may 
also contain some brass components. 

Replacement of this bubbler tap and Its connection plumbing with lead- 
free materials will significantly reduce iead exposure at this location. If 
replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing 
this tap for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce 
lead concentrations and iead exposure. 



2 





Outlet: Water Cooler Fountain (01WC002) 

Location: Hallway between Gym and Auditorium, northeast side 
Results; Pl=17 parts per billion, P2=17 parts per biilion 
F01=12 parts per billion, F02=3 parts per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the water 
cooler unit The water cooler is an Eikay model LKEZFS8. This mode! contains 
some brass components. Connecting plumbing to the cooler unit may aiso 
contain brass components. 

Replacement of the entire unit is recommended and will significantly reduce 
lead exposure at this location. If replacement is not currently feasible, sample 
results indicate thatflushingthis tap for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation 
is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 


Outlet: Sink Faucet (01CF004) 



Location; Classroom 109, northwest wal! 

Results; Pl~17 parts per billion, P2=10 parts per billion 
FQ1=1 part per biilion, F02=2 parts per billion 

These resuits suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from 
the faucet and its connecting plumbing. The base of this faucet is 
chrome plated brass, and has a brass connection on the underside of 
the sink. Hot and cold water lines connect to this faucet with a brass 
mixer fitting under the sink. Connecting plumbing in the cabinet 
under the sink may also contain additional brass components. 

Replacement, of this faucet and its connection plumbing with lead 
free materials wili significantly reduce lead exposure at this location. 
If replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that 
flushing this tap for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely 
to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 



This faucet aiso has an aerator/screen at the outiet. If the faucet is not replaced, the aerator/screen should 
be removed, inspected for particulate accumulations, scrubbed clean, and reinstalled. If particulates are 
found, the aerator/screen should be periodically checked and cleaned. 


3 




Outlet: Bubbler Fountain (02DW020) 

Location: Classroom 201, southeast wall 
Results; Pl=37 parts per billion, P2=24 parts per billion 
FG1=2 parts per billion, F02=non-detect 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the 
bubbler and its connecting plumbing. This bubbler fixture is made of 
chrome plated brass and has a brass connector on the underside of the 
sink. The bubbler also has a chrome plated brass flow regulator installed 
between the operating valve and the outlet. The connecting plumbing is 
copper with lead solder and includes a brass shut off valve. 

Replacement of this bubbier tap and its connection plumbing with lead-free materials wiii significantly reduce 
lead exposure at this location, if replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing 
this tap for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 



Outlet Sink Faucet (02CF022) 

Location: Classroom 202, northwest wail 
Results: Pl=7 parts per billion, P2=24 parts per billion 

F01~2 parts per billion, FG2=1 part per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the faucet 
and its connecting plumbing. The base of this faucet is chrome plated brass, 
and has a brass connection on the underside of the sink. Connecting plumbing 
in the cabinet under the sink is made up of brass connectors; copper piping 
with lead solder and brass shut off valves. 

Replacement of this faucet and its connection plumbing with iead free materials will significantly reduce lead 
exposure at this iocatlon. If replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushingthis tap 
for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 

This faucet also has an aerator/screen at the outlet. If the faucet is not replaced, the aerator/screen should 
be removed, inspected for particulate accumulations, scrubbed clean, and reinstalled, if particulates are 
found, the aerator/screen should be periodically checked and cleaned. 






Outlet: Bubbler Fountain (01DW013) 

Location: Classroom 104, southwest wall 
Results; Pl=43 parts per billion, P2=106 parts per billion 
F01=3 parts per billion, FG2=2 parts per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the bubbler 
and its connecting plumbing. This bubbler fixture is made of chrome plated brass 
and has a brass connector on the underside of the sink. Connecting plumbing 
in the cabinet under the sink is made up of brass connectors; copper piping with 
lead solder, and a brass shut off valve. 



Replacement of this bubbler tap and its connection plumbing with lead free materials wiil significantly reduce 
lead exposure at this location. If replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing 
this tap for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 


Outlet: Sink Faucet (01GF014) 

Location: Classroom 104, southwest wall 
Results: Pl^SG parts per billion, P2=36 parts per billion 

F01=2 parts per billion, FG2=1 part per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the faucet and its 
connecting plumbing. The base of this faucet is chrome plated brass, and has a brass 
connection on the underside of the sink. Connecting plumbing in the cabinet under 
the sink is made up of brass connectors; copper piping with lead solder and brass shut 
off valves. 



Replacement of this faucet and its connection plumbing with lead free materials will significantly reduce lead 
exposure at this location, if replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing this tap 
for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 


This faucet also has an aerator/screen at the outlet. If the faucet is not replaced, the aerator/screen should 
be removed, inspected for particulate accumulations, scrubbed clean, and reinstalled. If particulates are 
found, the aerator/screen should be periodically checked and cleaned. 



Outlet: Bubbler Fountain (G2DW027) 

Location: Classroom 204, southwest wall 
Results; Pl=18 parts per billion, P2=8 parts per billion 
F01=2 parts per billion, FG2=1 part per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the bubbler 
and Its connecting plumbing. This bubbler fixture is made of chrome plated brass 
and has a brass connector on the underside of the sink. The bubbler also has a 
chrome plated brass flow regulator installed between the operating valve and the 
outlet The connecting plumbing is copper with lead solder and includes a brass 
shut off valve. 

Replacement of this bubbler tap and its connection plumbing with lead free materials will significantly reduce 
lead exposure at this location. If replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing this 
tap for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 



Outlet: Bubbler Fountain (02DW029) 

Location: Classroom 205, northeast wall 
Results: Pl=39 parts per billion, P2=±4 parts per billion 

FQ1-11 parts per billion, F02=l part per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the bubbler and 
its connecting plumbing. This bubbler fixture is made of chrome plated brass and has 
a brass connector on the underside of the sink. Connecting plumbing in the cabinet 
under the sink is made up of brass connectors and copper piping with lead solder. 



Replacement of this bubbler tap and Its connection plumbing with lead free materials will significantly reduce 
lead exposure at this location. If replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing 
this tap for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 


6 



Outlet: Bubbler Fountain (G2DW031) 

Location: Classroom 206, southwest wall 
Results; Pl=84 parts per billion, P2=7 parts per billion 
F01=l part per billion, F02=non-detect 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the bubbler 
and its connecting plumbing. This bubbler fixture is made of chrome plated brass 
and has a brass connector on the underside of the sink. The bubbler also has a 
chrome plated brass flow regulator installed between the operating valve and the 
outlet. Connecting plumbing in the cabinet under the sink should be checked for 
brass components and copper piping with lead solder. 



Replacement of this bubbler tap and its connection plumbing with lead free materials will significantly reduce 
lead exposure at this location, if replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing 
this tap for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 


Outlet: Sink Faucet (01CF016) 

Location: Classroom 106, northeast wall 
Results: Pl=402 parts per billion, P2=61 parts per billion 

F01=4 parts per billion, F02=l part per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the faucet 
and its connecting plumbing. The base of this faucet is chrome plated brass, 
and has a brass connection on the underside of the sink. Connecting plumbing 
in the cabinet under the sink is partly made up of brass connectors; copper 
piping with lead solder, and brass shut off valves. 

Replacement of this faucet and its connection plumbing with lead free materials 
will significantly reduce lead exposure at this location, if replacement is not 



currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing this tap for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation 


is likely to reduce iead concentrations and iead exposure. 


This faucet also has an aerator/screen at the outlet If the faucet is not replaced, the aerator/screen should 
be removed, inspected for particulate accumulations, scrubbed clean, and reinstalled, if particulates are 
found, the aerator/screen should be periodically checked and cleaned. 


7 


Outlet: Sink Faucet (02CF032) 

Location: Classroom 207, northeast wall 
Results; P±=21 parts per billion, P2=23 parts per billion 
F01=5 parts per billion, F02=l part per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the 
faucet and its connecting plumbing. The base of this faucet is chrome plated 
brass, and has a brass connection on the underside of the sink. Connecting 
plumbing in the cabinet under the sink is partly made up of brass connectors; 
copper piping with lead solder, and brass shut off valves. 

Replacement of this faucet and its connection plumbing with lead free materials will significantly reduce lead 
exposure at this location, if replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing this tap 
for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 



Outlet: Bubbler Fountain (02DW033) 

Location: Classroom 207, northeast wall 
Results: Pl=20 parts per billion, P2=4 parts per billion 

F01=3 parts per billion, FQ2=3 parts per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be 
from the bubbler and its connecting plumbing. Parts of this 
bubbler fixture are made of brass and it has a brass connector 
on the underside of the sink. Connecting plumbing in the cabinet 
under the sink is partly made up of brass connectors; copper 
piping with lead solder, and a brass shut off valve. 



Replacement of this bubbler tap and its connection plumbing with lead free materials will significantly reduce 
lead exposure at this location. If replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing 
this tap for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 


8 


Outlet: Bubbler Fountain (02DW035) 

Location: Classroom 208, southwest waif 
Results; Pl=12 parts per billion, P2=19 parts per billion 
F01=6 parts per billion, FG2=3 parts per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the bubbler and its 
connecting plumbing. This bubbler fixture is made of chrome plated brass and has a 
brass connector on the underside of the sink. Connecting piumbing in the cabinet under 
the sink shouid be checked for brass components and copper piping with lead solder. 

Replacement of this bubbler tap and its connection plumbing with iead free materials 
will significantly reduce lead exposure at this location. If replacement is not currently 
feasible, sample results indicate that flushing this tap for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to 
reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 



Outlet: Sink Faucet (02CF034) 

Location: Classroom 208, southwest wall 
Results: Pl=19 parts per billion, P2=12 parts per billion 

F01=3 parts per billion, FQ2=2 parts per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from the faucet and its 
connecting plumbing. The base of this faucet is chrome plated brass, and has a brass 
connection on the underside of the sink. Connecting plumbing in the cabinet under 
the sink should be checked for brass components and copper piping with iead solder. 


MO image! 
AVAILABLE 


Replacement of this faucet and its connection plumbing with lead free materials will significantly reduce iead 
exposure at this location, if replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing this tap 
for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 


9 




Outlet: Kstclien Faucet (01KC0 19) 

Location: Room 1.08, southwest wail 
Results; Pl=17 parts per billion, P2=5 parts per billion 
F01=4 parts per billion, FG2=1 part per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from 
the faucet and its connecting plumbing. This fixture appears to 
be a Delta two handled faucet. This model faucet typically has a 
brass tube in its deck body and may contain some additional brass 
components. Connecting plumbing in the cabinet under the sink 
should be checked for brass components and copper piping with 
lead solder. 

Replacement of this faucet and its connection plumbing with lead free materials will significantly reduce lead 
exposure at this location. If replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing this tap 
for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 

This faucet also has an aerator/screen at the outlet. If the faucet is not replaced, the aerator/screen should 
be removed, inspected for particulate accumulations, scrubbed clean, and reinstalled, if particulates are 
found, the aerator/screen should be periodically checked and cleaned. 



Outlet: Sink Faucet (02CF036) 

Location: Classroom 209, southwest wall 
Results: Pi =7 parts per billion, P2=21 parts per billion 

F01=5 parts per billion, F02=l part per billion 

These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from 
the faucet and its connecting plumbing. The base of this faucet is 
chrome plated brass, and has a brass connection on the underside 
of the sink. Hot and cold water lines connect to this faucet with 
a brass mixer fitting under the sink. Connecting plumbing in the 
cabinet under the sink may also contain additional brass connectors 
and copper plumbing with lead solder. 

Replacement of this faucet and its connection plumbing with lead free materials will significantly reduce lead 
exposure at this location. If replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushingthis tap 
for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 

This faucet also has an aerator/screen at the outlet. If the faucet is not replaced, the aerator/screen should 
be removed, inspected for particulate accumulations, scrubbed clean, and reinstalled. If particulates are 
found, the aerator/screen should be periodically checked and cleaned. 



10 



Outlet: Kstclien Faucet, Let (04KC043) 

Location: Outbuilding Unit 2 DHHS Office 
Results; Pl=17 parts per billion, P2=3 parts per billion 
F01=2 parts per billion, F02=3 parts per billion 


These results suggest the highest contribution of lead may be from 
the faucet and its connecting plumbing. The faucet is a Delta 400. 

This model faucet valve has brass components. This style faucet 
also has a mixing valve that may allow mixing of hot and cold water. 

Connecting plumbing in the cabinet under the sink may also contain 
brass components. 

Replacement of this faucet and its connection plumbing with lead free materials will significantly reduce lead 
exposure at this location. If replacement is not currently feasible, sample results indicate that flushing this tap 
for 3 minutes following periods of stagnation is likely to reduce lead concentrations and lead exposure. 

This faucet also has an aerator/screen atthe outlet If the faucet is not replaced, the aerator/screen should be 
removed, inspected for particulate accumulations, scrubbed clean, and reinstalled. If particulates are found, 
the aerator/screen should be periodically checked and cleaned. 



ii 


While the remaining 25 outlets showed sample results to be at levels requiring no further action, several 
recommendations have been identified. 

The fourth sample (F02) at all 43 outlets following approximately 3 minutes of use and flushing at a reduced 
flow resulted in reduced lead concentrations of 3 parts per billion or less. This indicates that flushing of all 
taps used for drinking, cooking, and/or food preparation for 4 minutes following periods of stagnation will 
further reduce lead exposure. It is recommended that a flushing operational procedure be developed for use 
by staff responsible for plumbing operations and maintenance with emphasis on flushing after weekends and 
holidays. 

Seventeen of these twenty' five outlets are comprised of similar materials as the outlets listed above and 
could potentially experience higher lead levels under extended periods of stagnation. These faucets/fountains 
include; 

* Sink Side Bubbler Units in Classroom 109 (01DW003), Classroom 101 (01DW007), Classroom 102 
(01DW009), Classroom 202 (02DW023), Classroom 103 (01DW011), Classroom 203 (02DW02.5), 
Classroom 106 (G1DW015), Classroom 107 (01DW017), and Classroom 209 (02DW037) 

« Chrome Plated Brass Base Faucets in Classroom 101 (01CF008), Classroom 201 (02CF021), 
Classroom 103 (01CF012), Classroom 203 (02CF024), Classroom 204 (02CF026), Classroom 205 
(02CF028), and Classroom 107 (01CF018) 

« Delta 400 Model Faucet in Out Building Unit 2 (04KC044) 

Replacement of these fixtures with lead free materials is also recommended. 

The remaining eight outlets showed sample results of 15 parts per billion or less, requiring no further action 
or additional recommendations. These faucets/fountains include: 

* Sink Faucets in Classroom 102 (01CF010) and the Clinic (01CFQ06) 

* Kitchen Faucets in the Community Room Kitchen (01KC005), Classroom 206 (02CF030), Out 
Building Unit 1 (03KC040 and 03KCQ41) 

* Water Coolers in Out Building Unit 1 (03DW038 and 03DW039) 


12 



The consecutive samples taken on October 31, 2015, at three sites in the main school building and one site 
from each of the two out building units all provide additional confirmation that the highest contribution of lead 
appears to be from the individual faucet/fcuntains and not from the larger diameter supply plumbing within 
the main school building or the two out building units. Results of the consecutive sample monitoring are listed 
in the table below. 


— 

BH 

■ ■ 


■ 

Bllll 



llll 


If 

LOCATION 

LEAD RESULT (PARTS PER 8ILU0R 

ND ~ 

NOT- 

DETECTED) 

Class room 109 
S;uf faucet :010rQ04' 

3 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

Classroom 102 
Sink faucet iOlCPOlO 

If 2 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

Classroom 209 
Sink Faucet ;02CF036:. 

3 

1 

.1 

1. 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

Out Building Unit .1 
Kitchen faucet -03KC040) 

1 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

Out Building Urn! 2 
Kitchen Faucet :04KC044'- 

illllli 2 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

ND 

1 

1 

ND 

ND 


13 


The DEO recommends school facilities take action if samples from any drinking water outlets show copper 
ievels greater than 1.3 parts per million. Based on the sampling conducted at43faucets/fountains on October 
31, 2015, the foliowing two drinking water outiets both located in Outbuilding Unit 1, had copper water level 
results greater than 1.3 parts per million. These two outiets are listed below with their sample results. While 
the remaining two outlets in Outbuilding Unit 1 had satisfactory copper results, copper results from all four 
outlets in Outbuilding Unit. 1, along with the consecutive sample results for Outbuilding Unit 1, suggests that 
copper leaching is occurring in the building plumbing and copper service line due to excessive stagnation and 
lack of use. Additional work with the school will be performed by the DEQ to address this issue. 


Outlet: Kitchen Faucet, Left (03KC041) 

Location: Outbuilding Unit 1, Proposed Preschool 
Results: Pl=0.33 parts per million, P2=1.84 parts per million 

F01=1.07 parts per million, FQ2=1.12 parts per million 



Outlet: Water Cooler. Left (03DW038) 

Location: Outbuilding Unit 1, Proposed Preschool 
Results: Pl=2.77 parts per million, P2=1.37 parts per million 

FQ1=1,2 parts per million, F02=1.03 parts per million 




Department of Environmental Quality 
18-Point Partnering Plan 


1. After Action Plan Frequently Asked Questions will be ready by noon on 
November 16, 2015 

• First version complete - updated as needed 

2. School test data 

• School reports to be expedited 

• Steve Busch creates summary reports 

• George Krisztian creates summary spreadsheets 

3. Blood exposure 

• DHHS is lead on providing data 

4. Meeting with Mayor Karen Weaver 

• Harvey Hollins lead - Dan Wyant, Jim Sygo, and George Krisztian to 
attend 

5. Messaging our Partnering Plan 

• Provide ongoing public updates regarding Governor’s 1 0-point plan 

• Continue emphasis on the availability of free testing for Flint residents 

• DEQ’s Office of Environmental Assistance to direct the public to the Flint 
water Web site: www. roi .gov/flintwater 

6. Sampling Protocol 

• Establish alignment with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
Region 5, on sampling protocol 

7. Lead service line replacement 

• Expand the Revolving Loan Fund directed at lead service line replacement 

• Amy Epkey, Maggie Pallone, and Sonya Butler 



DEQ 18-Point Partnering Plan 
Page 2 


8. Partner with EPA 

• Dan Wyant — > Susan Hedman 

• Jim Sygo — > Bob Kaplan 

• Mike Prysby and Steve Busch — > Darren Lytle and Mike Schock 

• George Krisztian — >Tom Burke 

• DEQ’s Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance (ODWMA) 
staff — >EPA, Region 5, staff (Jennifer Crooks and Tom Poy) 

9. Meet with Charles Stewart Mott Foundation to discuss Lead Service Line 
Identification Study 

10. Lead Education Program 

• DHHS is the lead on Lead Education Program 

1 1 . Moving Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) forward 

• Proactive meetings with KWA 

12. Participate actively with Flint Technical Advisory Council 

13. Utilize Joan Rose and Michigan State University water expertise 

14. Public outreach 

• Flint Mayor Karen Weaver 

• Genesee County Health Department 

• Drs. Lawrence Reynolds, Eden Wells, and Matthew Davis 

• Ministers 

• Land Bank 

• Legislators 

• Citizens 

15. Outreach to schools 

• EPA guidance on testing 

• Work with State Superintendent Brian Whiston 

• ODWMA staff to work on literature 

16. Make recommendations to EPA about Lead and Copper Rule 

17. Compliance Communication letter sent on November 9, 2015 

• Wait until after December 30, 2015 



DEQ 18-Point Partnering Plan 
Page 3 


18. Enhance coordination with health officials regarding personal health 
notifications of drinking water issues 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Monday, December 07, 2015 3:34 PM 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 
(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. 
(DHHS) 

2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 
CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update.pdf; What is a Part Per Billion.pdf 


Importance: 


High 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

• Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

• Document on What is a Part Per Billion. 

As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. I have also added Richard Baird to this weekly email. 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


Key Actions : 

On December 3, 2015, DHHS released blood lead level testing data. The data covered 
the time frame between January 1 , 201 0, and November 1 3, 2015. The data was 
broken down by population set and by demographic. The population sets included the 
state of Michigan as a whole, Genesee County as a whole, and the city of Flint ZIP 
Codes 48501 to 48507. The demographic sets broke the populations down into the age 
groups of: “Children younger than 6 Years Old,” “Children 6 to 17 Years Old,” “Adults 18 
Years and Older,” and “Total Number of People of All Ages Tested.” 

On December 3, 2015, the DEQ released the lead in drinking water data and final report 
for Eisenhower Elementary School. The findings in the report were very similar in 
nature to those found in the report for Freeman Elementary School. There were a 
number of fixtures and plumbing immediately adjacent to fixtures that were imparting 
lead into the water. The report recommends replacement of these fixtures and related 
plumbing. 

On December 4 and 5, 2015, staff from the DEQ and DLARA conducted a plumbing 
evaluation and subsequent sampling of the fixtures used for drinking water consumption 
at Potter Elementary School in Flint. There were a total number of 288 samples taken 
at 57 different locations throughout the school. 

Positions : 

There are no new positions to report since last week. 

Concerns : 

There are no new concerns to report since last week. 

Significant Events : 

On November 30, 2015, Director Dan Wyant and George Krisztian met with water 
quality expert Dr. Joan Rose of Michigan State University. The purpose of the meeting 
was to discuss the situation in Flint and to seek guidance on approaches for addressing 
the issue. Dr. Rose expressed that she felt there were three different fronts necessary 
to address the issue. These were to create a “Trust Plan,” a “Communications Plan,” 
and a plan to “Get the lead out.” Dr. Rose provided several different examples of 
communities that had undergone similar challenges and what approaches worked and 
what approaches did not. 




FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


On December 3, 2015, representatives from the Governor’s office, DEQ, and Office of 
Urban Initiatives met with Flint City Mayor Karen Weaver and members of her transition 
team. The purpose of the meeting was primarily introductory in nature, and the 
conversations were at a high level discussing the needs of the city as well as how 
communications with the residents of the city could be improved. There was also 
discussion of the lead testing results, both for home owners and in the schools. There 
was particular interest in the sampling protocol that was used to obtain samples in the 
schools. Overall, the conversation was very positive, with everyone agreeing that a 
coordinated effort was necessary to be able to effectively address the lead issue. 

On December 3, 201 5, Director Dan Wyant was interviewed by Lori Jane Gliha for a 
segment on America Tonight. The questions mainly focused on what had happened in 
the past and were tough. The responses echoed the message that the DEQ 
empathizes with the residents of Flint; we are committed to bringing about a resolution; 
we have a plan; we are moving forward; and we recognize that we need to rebuild trust 
in the community. 

On December 4, 2015, representatives of the DEQ (Jim Sygo, Karen Tommasulo, and 
George Krisztian) met with Flint Mayor Karen Weaver and other city officials for the 
weekly coordination meeting. Calling into the meeting were representatives of DHHS 
and DLARA. The blood lead data that DHHS released the previous day was discussed, 
and Dr. Eden Wells provided detailed comment on the data. There was also detailed 
discussion regarding the Revolving Loan Fund and how it might be utilized to help 
address the issue of lead service line replacement. 

On December 4, 2015, representatives of the DEQ (Jim Sygo, Karen Tommasulo, and 
George Krisztian) met with Flint Community Schools Superintendent Bilal Tawwab. The 
main topic of discussion was a review of the lead in drinking water data obtained to 
date. Superintendent Tawwab was informed that the schools, in general, were all 
following a similar pattern in that the sources of lead appear to be coming primarily from 
fixtures and the adjacent plumbing. Superintendent Tawwab indicated that his office 
has already made the decision to follow all recommendations in the reports. It was also 
agreed that a monthly meeting would be helpful to ensure that the process kept moving 
forward. In addition, there was discussion about a document that the DEQ would create 
that would explain what constituted a part per billion or ppb. A draft document without 
graphics was given to Superintendent Tawwab, and he indicated that the final version 
would be a very helpful aid to parents and students. 

Changes from Previous Report : 

• Draft sampling instructions were developed for lead and copper compliance 

sampling, incorporating comments by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA). The revised document is being sent back to the EPA for final comment. 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 3 


• DEQ staff met with DHHS staff to assist with development of a phosphate fact 
sheet. DHHS is the lead on this and will be submitting a revised version to the 
DEQ for final comment. This document is being developed to answer home 
owner questions regarding the safety of the addition of phosphate to the water 
received by the city of Flint from Detroit. 

• Staff from the DEQ provided a “Standby Operations” letter to the city of Flint. 

The purpose of the letter is to define what practices are to be utilized in the event 
of an emergency. 

• Staff from the DEQ followed up with the city of Flint on the status of the 
installation of corrosion control treatment. Pumps were installed on 
November 30, 201 5. It is anticipated that the startup of the system will begin 
during the week of December 7, 201 5. 

Other Item : 

Attached is the draft document, “What is a Part per Billion.” 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


December 7, 2015 



What is a Part per Billion? 


1 dollar in a stack of 1 dollar bills 62 miles high 
1 dime in a stack of dimes 800 miles high 
1 penny in 10 million dollars 
1 second in 32 years 
1 foot of a trip to the moon 

1 inch of a trip from the North Pole to the South Pole 

1 apple in over 10,000 truckloads 

1 drop of water in 850 aquariums 20 gallons in size 

1 single pitch from every game, of every major league baseball 
team, played over the course of 700 seasons 



From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Friday, December 11, 2015 11:17 AM 

To: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Scott, Allison (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth (GOV); 

Bedan, Morgan (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. (DHHS) 

Subject: RE: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 

ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 


I particularly like the explanation of a Part Per Billion and suggest that just as a postscript that this be included whenever 
we send out a memo on these kinds of issues that use technical explanations, it reaily makes it easier for a citizen to 
understand. 


From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, December 7, 2015 3:34 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV) < scottal2@michigan.gov >; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michigan.gov >; Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV) < Agenj@michigan.gov >; Emmitt, Beth (GOV) < emmittb@michigan.gov >; Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 
< BedanM@michigan.gov >; Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) < WyantD@michhgan.gov >; Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DickinsonS@michigan.gov >; Edgerton, Sh 
(LARA) < EdgertonSl@michigan.gov >; Dykema, Linda D. (DHHS) < DykemaL@michigan.gov > 

Subject: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 


>; Edgerton, Shelly 


Dear Governor’s Office: 


Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 


• Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

• Document on What is a Part Per Billion. 


As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. I have also added Richard Baird to this weekly email. 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, December 14, 2015 4:21 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 

(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. 

(DHHS) 

Subject: 2015-12-14 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 

CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 2015-12-14 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update.pdf; 

Resident_Sampling_Instructions-12-ll-2015_508290_7.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

• Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

• Revised Drinking Water Lead and Copper Sampling Instructions document 

As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


Key Actions : 

On December 9, 201 5, DEQ staff held a conference call with staff from the city of Flint 
and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to discuss DEQ’s comments 
regarding EPA’s preliminary assessment of corrosion control optimization for the city of 
Flint. The preliminary assessment was to identify and document activities necessary to 
enable the EPA and the DEQ to provide advice and support the city in maintaining 
optimal corrosion control while maintaining their source of water from Detroit as well as 
during and after the upcoming transition to the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) 
pipeline. During the discussion, it was agreed that the document needed to be broken 
down into two separate documents. The first document would identify the absolute 
needs necessary for Flint to transition to the KWA for their source water. The second 
document would outline actions that the city of Flint could take moving forward that 
would provide useful scientific information but would not impede the transition to the 
KWA. 

On December 1 1 , 2015, staff from the DEQ, the EPA, and the city of Flint, along with 
their consultant (Lockwood, Andrews & Newnam, Inc. [LAN]), met to discuss the various 
projects that needed to be completed in order for the city to switch its water source to 
the KWA. The main topic of discussion was how to balance the overarching concern of 
ensuring that the transition did not create safety issues, while at the same time taking 
precautions to ensure that the project did not run overtime or over budget. There were 
a number of proposals made during the discussion, and LAN will meet with the EPA on 
December 15, 2015, to discuss the various options in more detail. 

On December 1 1 and 12, 2015, staff from the DEQ and DLARA conducted a plumbing 
evaluation and subsequent sampling of the fixtures used for drinking water consumption 
at the Flint Community School’s administration building and Holmes 3-6 STEM 
Academy in Flint. There were a total number of 74 samples taken at 12 different 
locations throughout the administration building and 222 samples taken at 43 different 
locations throughout the school. There were 296 samples taken in total at the two 
facilities. 

Positions : 

There are no new positions to report since last week. 

Concerns : 

During the meeting on December 1 1 , 201 5, among the DEQ, the EPA, the city of Flint, 
and LAN, the EPA proposed that the city of Flint run a 12-inch line in addition to the 
existing main that would enable the city of Flint to conduct in-depth studies for switching 
to the KWA. The cost of this line would be approximately $4 million, and currently there 




FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


is no funding source identified that could cover this expense. The city expressed 
concerns that it was being asked to cover expenses for measures that other supplies 
would not be expected to implement. LAN will meet with the EPA to discuss other 
options. 

Significant Event : 

On December 8, 2015, the Department of Technology, Management and Budget 
(DTMB) confirmed that the e-mail sent from Liane Shekter Smith on August 25, 2015, to 
Lee-Anne Walters was successfully delivered to the gmail.com system at the e-mail 
address provided by Ms. Walters. The DTMB was asked to confirm delivery of that 
e-mail based on an accusation that the DEQ never responded to an inquiry, and then 
when a copy of the original e-mail was provided, an accusation was made with respect 
to the authenticity of the e-mail. 

Changes from Previous Report : 

• DHHS incorporated comments from the DEQ regarding a phosphate fact sheet 
being designed for public education purposes. DHHS then finalized the fact 
sheet utilizing the suggestions provided by the DEQ. 

• Instructions for lead and copper sampling were finalized, based on comments 
received from the EPA. The final draft was shared with city of Flint personnel on 
December 1 1 , 201 5, for use in their next round of lead and copper compliance 
monitoring. Microsoft Word and pdf versions were posted on the DEQ Web site 
on December 14, 2015, to replace the previous version of the instructions. 

• The city of Flint has hired an outside consultant to identify 150 Tier 1 sites for a 
sampling pool for use in compliance with the Lead and Copper Rule. This effort 
is being taken to ensure that future sampling events include verified and 
documented Tier 1 sampling sites to ensure compliance with the Lead and 
Copper Rule. 

• DEQ staff visited Control Station #2 to observe the operation of the phosphate 
feed system. The inspection of the phosphate feed system confirmed that the 
system is in operation and the system is dosing at 2.5 mg/I as phosphate. A 
couple of minor provisions had not been completed at the time of the inspection 
but do not currently affect the operation of the supplemental addition of 
phosphate to the water. 

• DEQ staff modified the Act 399 construction permit for the Flint raw water 
transmission line. The modification was needed to allow for rerouting of the 
transmission main due to poor soil conditions that were encountered along the 
original route. 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 3 


Other Item : 

Attached is the revised Drinking Water Lead and Copper Sampling Instructions 
document. 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 

9 

December 14, 2015 



DRINKING WATER LEAD AND COPPER SAMPLING INSTRUCTIONS 


Dear Resident: 

Thank you for helping to monitor for lead and copper in your drinking water. This sampling is 
required by the federal and state Safe Drinking Water Acts, and is being accomplished with 
the cooperation of homeowners, residents, and water system customers. 

It is important that you follow these instructions so we obtain an accurate measurement of the 
lead and copper in your drinking water. This sample should represent the water you would 
typically drink and the faucet from where you drink the water. Select a faucet for sampling 
that was used the day before you intend to sample. Call your water supply if you have 
questions. 

1 . Water must sit idle in the pipes for an extended length of time before sampling. 

Therefore, do not use any water in the house for at least 6 hours before sampling. The 
best times to sample are early morning or after returning from work. 

2. Select an unfiltered/untreated faucet in the KITCHEN or BATHROOM that is commonly 
used for drinking. DO NOT sample from a laundry sink or a hose spigot as these samples 
cannot be used for compliance. DO NOT use a faucet that has a filter attached to it 
unless you bypass the filter. DO NOT use a faucet that is connected to a home water 
treatment device (like a water softener, iron filter, reverse osmosis) unless you bypass the 
home water treatment device. 

3. Place the open sample bottle below the faucet and gently open the COLD water tap. If 
you have a single handle faucet, turn it fully to the COLD side. Fill the sample bottle to 
the neck with the “first draw” of COLD water. 

4. Tightly cap the sample bottle and place in the sample kit provided. Review the sample kit 
label to ensure all information contained on the label is complete and correct. 

5. Answer the questions on the back of this form and sign the form. 

6. Attach this form to the bottle and leave it outside your front door for pick-up. 

7. Thank you again for your help. We will send you your individual results within 30 days of 
receiving them from the laboratory. A summary of information on this year’s lead and 
copper monitoring will be printed in the annual water quality report that will be made 
available by July 1 of next year. Contact your water supply if you have questions. 


If you have questions call: Or Contact: 

Water Supply: Michigan Department of Environmental Quality 


Manager or 
Water Operator: 

Phone: 


DEQ Contact: 
Phone: 


(rev. 12/2015) 



TO BE COMPLETED BY RESIDENT/CUSTOMER 


A. Which faucet did you use to fill the bottle? 

□ Kitchen □ Main bathroom □ Other 
If OTHER, please describe: 

B. When was the faucet last used before sampling? 

Date TIME AM/PM 

Note: If the faucet has been idle more than 24 hours, we might not analyze your 
sample or be able to use your sample for compliance purposes. 

C. When did you fill the bottle? 

DATE TIME AM/PM 

D. Is there a faucet mount filter? DYES □ NO 

If YES, was it bypassed? □ YES □ NO 

E. Is this faucet connected to a home treatment device such as a water softener, a 

reverse osmosis unit, an iron removal device OR is any kind of additive used in the 
home? DYES □ NO 

If YES, please describe: 


Note: If you have a home treatment device OR any kind of additive is used, it is 
possible we might not analyze your sample or be able to use your sample for 
compliance purposes. 

F. If any plumbing repairs or replacement has been done in the home since the previous 
sampling event, please note this information here: 

If YES, please describe: 

I have read the Drinking Water Lead and Copper Sampling Instructions and have taken a tap 
sample in accordance with these directions. 

Signature 


(rev. 12/2015) 







From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ) 

Monday, October 12, 2015 2:30 PM 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 
(GOV); Sedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

2015-10-12 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 
CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Chrono 042104 Letter.pdf; _www.freep.com_story_news_local_michigan_2015_10_10 
_misse.pdf; FW: Filter distribution data; 2015-10-12 Action Steps Week of October 
12-16.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office, 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

1 . 2004 Letter to EPA on Lead 

2. 10/11/15 Detroit Free Press Article 

3. Filter Distribution Data 

4. Updated Action Steps Document 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



Statf, of Michigan 

DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 

Lansing 

JENNIFER M, GRANHOLM 

GOVERNOR 


April 21, 2004 


Mr. Benjamin H. Grumbles, Acting Assistant Administrator 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
Washington, DC 20460 


Dear Mr. Grumbles: 

SUBJECT: State Programs to Control Lead in School Drinking Water 

Thank you for your letter of March 18, 2004, requesting information on efforts being 
taken by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) to control lead in 
drinking water at schools and day care facilities. The following information has been 
assembled by staff in our Water Division (WD) having the regulatory responsibility for 
public water systems. 

The WD continues to actively implement the requirements of the Lead and Copper Rule 
(LCR) authorized by the 1986 amendments to the federal Safe Drinking Water Act, 

1976 PA 399, as amended. In Michigan, we have approximately 900 schools and day 
care centers that meet the definition of a nontransient noncommunity (NTNC) public 
water system. All of these systems rely on groundwater as their source. Fortunately, 
groundwater in Michigan is not typically corrosive or conducive to significant lead 
leaching from water system components. 

As specified by the LCR, routine monitoring for lead and copper has been and 
continues to be conducted in these NTNC systems. Our experience has shown lead 
levels to be acceptable in these schools and day care centers when samples have been 
correctly collected from actual drinking water taps. From 1999 to 2003, the MDEQ 
laboratory analyzed 14,207 lead samples from NTNC public water systems. Only 
2.4 percent of these sample results exceeded the lead action level of 15 parts per billion 
(ppb). Over 94 percent of these results reported lead levels less than or equal to half 
the lead action level of 7,5 ppb, with 37 percent reporting lead as not detected. On the 
rare occasion that one of these NTNC systems exceeded the lead action level, the 
owners have typically eliminated exposure by supplying bottled water or removing the 
offending tap until a long-term solution has been instituted. Rarely have the elevated 
lead levels been attributed to a system-wide problem. In Michigan, it has been 
repeatedly demonstrated that elevated lead levels from drinking water taps in schools 
are diminished by fixture replacement. In the last 5 years, we have had only 10 action 
level exceedences reported from a totai of 1,750 NTNC public water systems. Only 
two of these systems have had to install corrosion control treatment. 



STEVEN E. CHESTER 

DIRECTOR L 


Deputy(s) 

M 


77 



“A\\n 

y7 

Director’s Office Staff 

D Ivls lon/Off Ice Chief js 
Prepared by: 

Name u.fwir'A C 

V\0 

Xl.VVi’A'f 

Division/Office L* 

> 0 


Log Letter No. f.Yi 

(U 


File No. 

Q Delogged 


EQOHOe {Rev. 1/2001) 



CONSTITUTION HALL • 525 WEST ALLEGAN STREET « P.O. BOX 30473 < LANSING, MICHIGAN 48909-7973 

www.miGhlgan.gQV * (800) 662-9278 



Mr. Benjamin H. Grumbles 
Page 2 
April 21, 2004 


In your letter, you state that schools are only subject to the requirements of the LCR if 
they have their own water system. This statement implies there is no benefit to those 
schools served by community public water systems. The WD feels strongly that the 
LCR does provide a significant benefit to schools and day care centers that are served 
by community public water systems (CPWS). Despite limitations in these regulations 
that severely restrict CPWS from using schools and day care centers as sampling sites, 
proper implementation of this regulation should result in reduced lead exposure for ail 
customers. For instance, schools and day care centers connected to CPWS serving 
more than 50,000 residents benefited from the LCR because these water systems have 
had to demonstrate and maintain optimal corrosion control. These large systems were 
required to reduce lead levels throughout their water system to the lowest levels 
possible. In addition, schools and day care centers connected to CPWS serving 
50,000 or fewer residents have benefited from proper implementation of the LCR 
because these water systems have had to achieve and maintain compliance with the 
lead action level. Furthermore, any CPWS that exceeded a lead action level also had to 
provide public notification and public service announcements in accordance with and on 
a frequency specified by the LCR. Therefore, schools and day care centers in these 
systems could choose to provide an alternate drinking water source until compliance 
was achieved and lead levels were reduced in their CPWS. 

Your letter also references the Lead Contamination Control Act (LCCA) of 1988, which 
recalled drinking water coolers with lead-lined water reservoir tanks and banned new 
drinking water coolers with lead parts. This law caused Michigan's state plumbing 
board to make changes in the construction code to ban lead materials in other drinking 
water system components as well. Items such as 50/50 lead-tin solder for household 
plumbing, lead packers and lead wool used for well screens, and brass fixtures having 
greater than 8 percent lead were among the items banned from future use in potable 
water systems. 

In 1988, prior to the LCCA, NTNC schools in Michigan were informed of the requirement 
to provide public notice regarding the potential for lead in drinking water, and they were 
mailed an example notice to use. All Michigan schools supplied by CPWS were also 
mailed the same information with a recommendation that they provide similar public 
notice although it was not required by law. 

In 1989, over 8,000 Michigan schools and day care centers were mailed information on 
the LCCA. We cited concerns about lead levels and recommended a sampling and 
flushing protocol be instituted at all taps used for consumption, not just the water 
coolers required by the LCCA. In addition, staff of the WD made presentations to state 
school business officials and to the environmental health association representing local 
health departments. Articles were also published in school and day care association 
newsletters. 


Mr. Benjamin H. Grumbles 
Page 3 
April 21, 2004 


In 1989, we also conducted a random telephone survey of 40 schools and 40 day care 
centers (both NTNC and those connected to another water system) regarding the 
LCCA, Seventy-five percent of the schools were aware of the LCCA requirements and 
50 percent had performed some monitoring, while 40 percent of the day care centers 
were aware of the LCCA requirements, and about 20 percent had sampled. 

In 1990, a second mailing to all 8,000 schools and day care centers was conducted, 
with updated information on the recall of water coolers as required by the LCCA and 
with the recommendations developed in Michigan on flushing drinking water outlets. In 
this letter, we also asked that any sample results be reported to us even though they 
were specifically not required to do so by the LCCA, About 30 of 500 school districts 
reported results from 720 “first draw” samples taken in over 200 buildings; 2.5 percent 
of these results exceeded the maximum contaminant level (MCL) of 50 ppb in effect at 
that time for lead, 8,6 percent exceeded 20 ppb, and 17.5 percent exceeded 10 ppb. It 
should be noted that all (104) flushed sample results reported lead levels less than 
10 ppb. We also noted that the overall average levels in first draw samples collected 
from kitchen faucets were higher than levels from the targeted lead lined water coolers 
that were the focus of the LCCA. As a result of this data, state staff did pilot testing in 
three school districts and provided technical assistance to schools and day care 
centers. Follow-up sampling and investigations were also accomplished by state staff in 
other school districts. 

As you mentioned, the LCCA also established a technical assistance program to 
support state activities to reduce lead contamination in schools. The WD is aware of 
the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) technical assistance fact 
sheets, technical bulletins training seminars, and the publication, “Lead in School 
Drinking Water.” As discussed, we conducted several mailings, made numerous 
presentations, conducted follow-up surveys, responded to requests for assistance, 
participated in several pilot tests to reduce lead levels, compiled data, conducted 
additional sampling, and responded to many telephone inquiries with appropriate 
technical assistance. All of these activities constitute our technical assistance program. 
However, no funding has ever been allocated to states for implementation of the LCCA. 
All of the activities performed by Michigan in response to the requirements of the LCCA 
were done so with resources diverted from other programs. The primary requirement of 
the LCCA was for schools that identified coolers on a list of those suspected to contain 
lead lining to repair, replace, remove, or sample to show that these coolers did not 
contribute to lead in the drinking water, if the schools did sample, they were also 
required to tell their customers that results were available. If schools had no coolers on 
the list, nothing further was required by the LCCA. Despite this limited application of the 
LCCA, Michigan has performed numerous activities beyond the scope specified in the 
LCCA without any federal funding, 


Mr. Benjamin H. Grumbles 
Page 4 

April 21, 2004 


Finally, you ask what the USEPA can do to further efforts in this voluntary program. We 
have several suggestions. First, we recommend that the USEPA consider allowing 
schools to be considered Tier 1 sampling sites in CPWS so that we can gain more 
information on possible lead exposure in schools. Allowing CPWS to use schools will 
afford them an opportunity to use sampling sites that are more accessible than private 
homes, more likely to be geographically distributed throughout their system, and likely 
to satisfy a large constituency (parents). From our experience, we also recommend that 
the USEPA consider a sampling protocol for schools that would determine if the fixtures 
at kitchen taps are a problem that could be simply resolved by replacement. The 
USEPA may also want to consider requiring the owner of these facilities to replace any 
remaining lead service lines supplying schools or day care centers. 

In conclusion, we understand that the detection of elevated lead levels at customer taps 
in Washington, DC, has caused the USEPA to focus on this issue. However, the MDEQ 
wants to emphasize that despite the limitations in this law, proper implementation of the 
LCR accomplishes adequate reduction in lead levels, Failure to carry out some rule 
provisions in one case should not be cause for disparaging implementation across the 
country, or for unnecessary revamping of this regulation. If you need further information 
or assistance, please contact Mr. James K. Cleland, Assistant Division Chief, WD, at 
517-241-1287, or you may contact me. 



Sinc^ly, 

£ 



Steven E. Chester 

Director 

517-373-7917 


cc: Mr. Stanley F. Pruss, Deputy Director, MDEQ 
Mr, Jim Sygo, Deputy Director, MDEQ 

Ms. JoAnn Merrick, Senior Executive Assistant to the Director, MDEQ 
Mr. Andrew W. Hogarth, MDEQ 
Mr. Richard A. Powers, MDEQ 
Mr. James K. Cleland, MDEQ 


Chemical testing could have predicted Flint's water crisis 


Page 1 of 6 


Chemical testing could have predicted Flint's water crisis 

By John Wisely and By Robin Erb, Detroit Free Press 7:14 a.m. EDT October 11, 2015 



(Photo: Ryan Garza, Detroit Free 
Press) 


Chemical tests could have predicted the corrosion in the pipes that is now being blamed for endangering the 
health of thousands of vulnerable Flint residents by elevating lead levels in their water supply, experts say. 

As the city scrambles to reconnect to the Detroit water system, the absence of such testing on the Flint River 
water is one of many missed opportunities that might have lessened or avoided the crisis, they say. 

“Any competent person should have seen this water will eat up iron and eat up lead,” Marc Edwards, a Virginia 
Tech professor and national expert on pipe corrosion, told the Free Press. Edwards said his own research 
shows that Flint River water, without additional controls, corrodes the lead inside pipes at 19 times the rate of 
water piped from Detroit. 


| ^§| DETROIT FREE PRESS 

Ij Why are lead levels in cliildren higher in 2 Flint ZIP codes? 

(httpV/www.freep.conVstoiy/news/local/rnichigan/TOlS TO 10 lead-danger- 
basics/73683934/1 


Among red flags that popped up over the last 18 months: 

• General Motors announced in October 2014 that it was pulling its engine plant off Flint water after workers there began noticing rust spots on newly 
machined parts. The city approved letting GM switch to water from Flint Township, but didn't change its own water treatment procedures. 

• The University of Michigan-Flint alerted city officials that it found elevated lead levels in its water in January, prompting the school to shut off some 
some drinking fountains and add water filters to others. 

• Testing in the fall of 2014 found E. coli in the city's water system, prompting "boil water" notices. The city's procedures for killing the E. coli produced 
chemical by-products known as trihalomethanes, which can cause cancer with long-term exposure. The city had to adopt additional measures to reduce 
them. 


“Common sense tells you that the Flint River is not your first choice of drinking water,” said Shawn McElmurry, who teaches civil and environmental 
engineering at Wayne State University and has followed Flint closely. 


DETROIT FREE PRESS 

O & A on Flint's water troubles 


fhttp:/A¥ww.freep.conVston'/newsTocaJ/michigan/2015/10/10/flint-water- 

aa/73693500/1 


Experts say the testing could have been done before the switch from the Detroit system. But officials from the Michigan Department of Environmental 
Quality note that that kind of testing isn’t required under federal drinking-water rules and has never been done in Michigan. What’s more, they said, the 
Flint River water, treated in the city’s plant, was already approved as a backup supply in case of interrupted service from Detroit. 

Other experts said the testing is more nuanced, part art and part science. Still, they acknowledge that by examining things such as the acidity of water 
and other factors, engineers could have estimated how much corrosion to expect once water from the Flint River was pumped into homes and 
businesses across the city. 

“Not every engineer in our field could do it, it’s a pretty specialized area," said David Cornwell, a Virginia-based engineering consultant and a technical 
adviser to the National Drinking Water Advisory Council, a group of experts that works with the Environmental Protection Agency on drinking water 
issues. 

DETROIT FREE PRESS 

Flint doctor makes state tell lead truth 


http://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/20 1 5/1 0/10/missed-opportunities-flint-water-crisis/73 . . . 10/12/2015 





Page 2 of 6 


Chemical testing could have predicted Flint's water crisis 



rhttD://www.freep.com/storv/news/local/michigaii/2015/10/10/hanna-attisha- 

profile/73600120/) 


The fix now will cost $12 million — a combination of money from the state, the city and the Flint-based non-profit C.S. Mott Foundation, which has 
pledged $4 million to help pay Detroit for the water while Flint waits to connect to a new water authority in partnership with Genesee County. 

Water woes began shortly after switch from Detroit 

Flint began using Flint River water as its main supply in April 2014. Before that, it bought Lake Huron water that was treated and delivered by the Detroit 
Water and Sewerage Department. Detroit ended that deal one day after Flint voted to join Genesee County in forming the Karegnondi Water Authority, 
which plans to build its own Lake Huron intake and pipe the water to the Flint Water Plant. 

Flint officials wanted to remain on Detroit's system, but the two sides couldn't agree on a price and a contract length. 

Once the switch to river water was made, the city, which was operating under a state-appointed emergency financial manager, faced one problem after 
another. Residents packed city council meetings and held protest marches to voice their anger about water quality. 

Experts say Flint's lead problems could have been held in check if the city had added phosphates to the water, as Detroit has done for years. The 
treatment doesn't eliminate lead entirely, but it does form a film over the pipes themselves, effectively sealing in the lead and reducing the amount in the 
water to acceptable levels. 

But when Flint switched to river water, it didn't add phosphates. Instead it added lime to soften the water. 

“The lime softening process has the added benefit of some corrosion control,” said Liane Smith, chief of Michigan’s Office of Drinking Water and 
Municipal Assistance. 

Smith said that once the switch was made, the state began testing for lead and copper, as is required by the federal Environmental Protection Agency. 

“Any new supply that comes along has to do two six-month rounds of monitoring for lead and copper out in their distribution system,” Smith said. If those 
tests show corrosion, additional steps, such as perhaps adding phosphates, are supposed to be followed. 

The first round oftesting completed in December 2014 showed lead levels of 6 parts per billion. The second round, completed in June of this year, 
showed they had almost doubled to 1 1 parts per billion. The EPA requires a remediation plan when levels reach 1 5 parts per billion and can demand 
action even below that mark on systems that serve more than 50,000 people. 

Cornwell said phosphates are considered more effective than lime softening and they don’t raise treatment costs substantially. But they have side effects, 
he said. 

“The negative is that nobody really likes phosphates out in the environment,” he said, noting they can find their way into rivers and lakes, fueling algae 
blooms such as the ones in Lake Erie. 

“There is more to it than saying we're just going to pump phosphates,” Cornwell said. “You may have to make other adjustments.” 


http://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/20 1 5/1 0/10/missed-opportunities-flint-water-crisis/73 ... 10/12/2015 


Page 3 of 6 


Chemical testing could have predicted Flint's water crisis 



A man crosses a bridge over the Flint River near the Hamilton Dam in downtown Flint on Thursday, Oct. 8, 2015. Flint has been getting its drinking water from the river 
since last year. (Photo: Ryan Garza, Detroit Free Press) 


Flint River water a challenge to clean up 

Flint River water was always going to pose more treatment challenges than the cold, clear water that comes from the bottom of Lake Huron, experts said. 

The river has been marked by decades of industrial pollution. Its tributaries channel farmland run-off into it and its temperature varies by season. Warmer 
water can promote bacteria growth. All of those factors make treating it to drinking-water standards more difficult. 

"The city was doing the best it could” to clean up pollutants, Edwards said, but added that corrosivity was inevitable 

He blamed the problems on a lack of expertise rather than intentional wrongdoing. 

“I think it started relatively innocently. They didn’t understand testing and they didn’t understand corrosivity,” he said. 

Last month, Edwards' research group released results of corrosion tests it conducted on Flint's water. For the test, researchers used copper pipe with 
lead solder, which is common in older homes. 

The tests showed Flint River water without added phosphates corroded the lead at 1 9 times the rate of Detroit water. Even when phosphates were 
added, it corroded at 16 times the rate of the Detroit water. 

“From the second it was switched, it was doomed from the lead problem,” Edwards said. 

When residents began complaining about the water, the city and state should have begun to rethink their testing, Edwards said. 

Problems were evident soon after the switch. 

In August last year, E. coli was found in the water and residents were urged to boil it before drinking it. The city treated it with disinfectant, but that 
produced by-products in the water known as trihalomethanes. Long-term exposure to them can cause cancer, so the city began making treatment 
adjustments. 

Then as summer turned to fall, workers at Flint’s GM engine plant began seeing rust on newly machined engine parts. GM's lab tests found high levels of 
chloride in the water used to wash down metal shavings and cool parts heated from the rapid machining action inside the plant, GM spokesman Tom 
Wickham said. 

GM tried to treat the water in the plant. It had drinking water delivered and tankers brought water for operations, Wickham said. 

But it eventually sought to connect to Flint Township's water system, which is supplied by Detroit. 

In December the connection was finalized and Detroit water began flowing to the plant, via Flint Township. 


http://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/2015/10/10/missed-opportuiiities-flint-water-crisis/73... 10/12/2015 



Page 4 of 6 


Chemical testing could have predicted Flint's water crisis 

In January 2015, lead was showing up at the University of Michigan’s Flint campus. School leaders become concerned about the water supply after the 
city issued "boil water" advisories to kill E. coli and realized they’d never done routine, thorough water testing. 

Tests in January and February showed elevated levels of lead and other problems in isolated areas — specifically in two infrequently used drinking 
fountains in two older buildings. 

Follow-up testing found other elevated levels of lead, and those sinks and fountains then were either fitted with filters or removed, said Mike Lane, 
director of the environment, health and safety department 

He said officials suspected the problem was in their pipes but notified the city anyway. 

In June, Miguel Del Toral of the Environmental Protection Agency drafted an internal memo noting the problems Flint had experienced with E. coli and 
the by-products of the chemicals used to treat it. 

"A major concern from a public health standpoint is lack of corrosion control treatment in the city of Flint for mitigating lead and copper levels in the 
drinking water," Del Toral wrote. 

The memo caused a stir when the American Civil Liberties Union exposed it. But the EPA told the Free Press on Friday that the memo was a draft that 
was never delivered to MDEQ officials, including Smith, whose names appear on it. 

The EPA did say it discussed the concerns raised in the memo with MDEQ officials in July, but the agency did not respond immediately to a request for 
details. 

Leaching lead not unique to Flint 

The problem of lead leaching into drinking water isn't unique to Flint. Across Michigan and around the country, pipes that carry water from the mains 
under the street into homes, businesses and schools often contain lead. Inside homes and business, many older plumbing fixtures and soldered pipes 
also contain it. 

Cornwell said officials from across the nation have formed a working group to review the lead and copper rules and look for ways to improve them. 
Among the things being considered is a national effort to remove lead pipes from water systems. 

But even if a national consensus formed around that idea, the process would take years, Cornwell said. A funding source for such a massive project also 
would be needed. 

Still, he said, removing the pipes is the only surefire way to eliminate lead from the system. 

"We can only do so much with water chemistry," he said. "We can only turn the knob so much." 

Contact John Wisely: 313-222-6825 orjwisely@freepress.com 
Contact Robin Erb: 313-222-2708 or rerb@freepress.com. 

TIME LINE 

April 16,2013: Flint signs agreement to join the Karegnondi Water Authority. 

April 17,2013: Detroit terminates contract with Flint, giving it one year to find a new water source. 

April 24, 201 4: Flint switches from Detroit water to Flint River water. 

April 30, 2014: Flint closes all valves connecting to Detroit water supply. 

June-Sept. 2014: Flint residents complain about smell, taste and discoloration of water. 

Dec. 16, 2014: Michigan Department of Environment Quality cites Flint for exceeding limits on disinfection by-products. 

Dec. 27, 2014: Flint's General Motors engine plant, citing high chloride levels in the water, switches off its hook-up to Flint, drawing water instead from 
neighboring Flint Township. 

Jan. 9, 201 5: Concerned about Flint’s water warnings, University of Michigan’s Flint campus begins testing its water, detecting lead in isolated, 


http://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/2015/10/10/missed-opportunities-flint-water-crisis/73... 10/12/2015 



Page 5 of 6 


Chemical testing could have predicted Flint's water crisis 

infrequently used areas. 

June 24, 201 5: Environmental Protection Agency drafts a report raising concerns about lead in Flint’s water system as a result of corrosion. It doesn’t 
send the report, but discusses its concerns with MDEQ officials in July. 

Sept. 24, 2015: Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha releases data showing spike in blood-lead levels in Flint children. 

Oct. 2, 201 5: State officials tell room packed with reporters that there's a problem with Flint's water. 

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1LoJP7S 







MORE STORIES 



http://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/20 1 5/1 0/10/missed-opportunities-flint-water-crisis/73 ... 10/12/2015 



Chemical testing could have predicted Flint's water crisis 


Page 6 of 6 


r/ston'/news/nation/2015/10/12/gun- 

laws-across-us- 

balance- 

supreme-court- 

considers- 

chicago- 

case/73794388/~) 

l/storv/new s/nation/2015/1 0/1 2/gun-laws-across- 
us-balance-sun rem e-cou rt-considers-chicago- 
case/73794388A 
Oct 12, 2015, 12:06 a.m. 


Flint doctor makes state tell 
lead truth 


r/ston'/news/local7michigan/20 15/10/ 10/han na- 
attisha- 

profile/73600 120/) 

f/sto rv/ new s/local/m ichigan/20 15/10/1 0/hanna- 

attisha-profile/73600120A 

Oct 11, 2015, 10 p.m. 






in case before high court 


http://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/2015/10/10/missed-opportunities-flint-water-crisis/73... 10/12/2015 



From: 

Sent: 

Subject: 


Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Monday, October 12, 2015 1:56 PM 
FW: Filter distribution data 


From: Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS) 

Sent: Friday, October 09, 2015 5:44 PM 

To: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Lyon, Nick (DHHS); Grijalva, Nancy (DHHS); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Minicuci, Angela (DHHS); 
Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS); Hertel, Elizabeth (DHHS) 

Subject: Filter distribution data 


MDHHS purchased total water filter distribution 10/6-10/9 = liilll 
Tuesday 

filters were distributed through MDHHS offices, GCCARD the local Community Action Agency, Flint 
Housing Commission, Early Head Start, Mott Park Neighborhood Association and Commissioners. 

Wednesday 

1,43$ filters were distributed through MDHHS offices and GCCARD. 

GCCARD is coordinating filter installations for seniors and home bound individuals. The (JAW pipe fitters 
are donating in kind services of $20,000 for this installation. United Way has given filters to homeless 
shelters and any undocumented immigrants that have come to the Center. Filters were delivered to 
several senior housing complexes for maintenance to install. 

Thursday 

!®| filters were distributed through MDHHS offices and GCCARD. 

MDHHS is also working to inform licensed non-school based daycares on where to get water filters. 
Friday 

111 Filters were distributed through MDHHS offices and GCCARD. 24 water pitchers were distributed as 
well 


l 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 12-16 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Identify schools and prioritize for 
assessment 

GCISD, GCHD, DEQ, 
DHHS, and Flint 

Steve Busch 


2. 

Get DLARA plumbers organized 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 


3. 

Complete sampling instructions 

DEQ, DHHS, and EPA 

Pat Cook 


4. 

MDARD information for restaurants 

MDARD, DHHS, and DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 


5. 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 


6. 

Approve Flint plan for water line 


Mike Prysby 


7. 

Lead education plan for schools for 
drinking water 

DHHS and DEQ 

Liane Shekter Smith 


8. 

Begin regular meetings with Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 


9. 

Schedule Water Treatment Plant 
tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 


10. 

Meet with schools and DLARA - 
invitation only 

DEQ, DLARA, and Flint 
schools 

Karen Tommasulo 


11. 

Update DEQ Web page 

DEQ 

Karen Tommasulo 


12. 

Contact DHHS to see where they 
are with United Way regarding 
emergency declaration 

DEQ and DHHS 

George Krisztian 


13. 

Circulate protocol draft with EPA 

DEQ and EPA 

Liane Shekter Smith 


14. 

Contact city about homeowner 
sample delivery 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 


15. 

Communicate to MDARD and Flint 
that business samples should be 
coordinated though DEQ laboratory 

DEQ, MDARD, and Flint 

Liane Shekter Smith 
George Krisztian 

Liane to call MDARD 
and 

George to call Flint 


i 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

October 10, 2015 


















































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

16. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Liane Shekter Smith 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 


17. 

Confirm Linda Dykema is Point of 
Contact for DHHS 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Done 

18. 

Contact KWA to find out if there are 
any bottlenecks we need to remove 

DEQ and KWA 

Mike Prysby 


19. 

Expedite 399 Plan and Phosphate 
Plan 

DEQ and Flint 

Mike Prysby 


20. 

Get update on service line index 
card conversion and identify where 
partial replacements exist 

DEQ and Flint 

Steve Busch 


21. 

Make sure DHHS gets information 
so they can cross reference 

DEQ and DHHS 

Steve Busch 


22. 

Legislative contacts 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 

Conference call with 
Sen. Jim Ananich 
scheduled for 
October 1 2 at 3 pm 

23. 

Legislative time line and summary 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 


24. 

Reconnect with State 
Superintendent Brian Whiston 

DEQ and Department of 
Education 

Dan Wyant 

Call scheduled for 
October 12 at 4:30 pm 

25. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

To be scheduled for 
October 1 5 

26. 

Change Part 54 of NREPA - 
Drinking Water Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
Liane Shekter Smith 
Sonya Butler 



2 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

October 10, 2015 













































From: Shaler, Karen (DEQ) on behalf of Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2015 5:05 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Dickinson, Sarah 

(GOV) 

Subject: Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT 

PRIVILEGED 


The Flint Drinking Water Action Plan was announced on October 2, 201 5. It included the following: 

• Testing in Flint public schools immediately 

• Offered free water testing to Flint residents 

• Provided free water filters to residents with concerns or who are included in state assistance 
programs 

• Expanding health exposure testing of individual homes 

• Accelerating corrosion controls in the Flint drinking water system 

• Accelerating water system improvements to address replacing lead service lines 

• Expediting the completion of the Karegnondi Water Authority pipeline 

• Expanding a Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee 

• Named Dr. Eden Wells as the Flint drinking water public health advisor 

• Boosted a comprehensive lead education program 

Testing in Flint Public Schools Immediately 

Samples were taken on October 2 and were received at DEQ laboratory over the weekend. Test 
results to date indicate 37 samples tested, 4 of which exceeded a federal action level, and 1 of those 
4 was a significant outlier. We will be compiling detailed information about which schools and area 
codes the test results came from and will be providing that information in our next update. 

We have met with DHHS, and we are working on developing response protocols, a communications 
plan, and guidance for schools when this data is reported. 

Offered Free Water Testing to Flint Residents 


We have received 4 sets of samples from Flint that represent individual residents. We will be 
compiling the total number and the results of those samples and reporting in a future report. 

Provided Free Water Filters to Residents with Concerns or Who are Included in State Assistance 
Programs 


DHHS held organizational meetings in Flint on October 5, and filter distribution by DFIHS started on 
October 6. Nick Lyon in DHHS is taking the lead in filter distribution. 

Expanding Health Exposure Testing of Individual Homes 

Dr. Wells and Dan Wyant have been in conversations about a protocol for exposure testing. Dr. 
Wells will take the lead on developing the protocol. 


i 



Accelerating Corrosion Controls in the Flint Drinking Water System 


A conference call was held with U.S. EPA Regional Administrator Susan Hedman and national 
corrosion control experts. We asked two questions: 

1 . Which is a safer water source - DWSD or Flint River? 

2. If you don’t have an opinion on the safer source, what criteria should we use for an 
evaluation? 

EPA staff would not commit to a preference, but their evaluation of the criteria clearly lead to 
the conclusion that DWSD was a safer water source. EPA committed to submitting technical 
assistance to the Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee (Advisory Committee) 
meeting, which will be held on October 7 at 2:00 p.m. in Flint City Hall. 

DEQ met with the Flint Mayor, the city manager, and their water staff. Flint agreed to 
expediting corrosion controls. We discussed the agenda for the Advisory Committee 
meeting. The Advisory Committee will be asked to evaluate two respective water sources at 
their Wednesday meeting. 

We expect the Advisory Committee to recommend the water source that would address not 
only lead safety but also other water safety issues. 

Accelerating Water System Improvements to Address Replacing Lead Service Lines 

Conversations with Congressman Kildee and EPA have clarified the state would be allowed to use 
Drinking Water Revolving Loan funds to replace private drinking water service lines. Senator Ananich 
has been approached to introduce language clarifying the state’s authority. 

Expediting the Completion of the Karegnondi Water Authority Pipeline 

Dan Wyant has talked to Genesee County Drain Commissioner Jeff Wright. Mr. Wright has provided 
a list of issues that would help expedite the completion of the Karegnondi Water Authority 
pipeline. They include truck weight and frost law exemptions, talent identification, and expediting 
permits. 

Expanding a Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee 

EPA has appointed their national technical expert to the Advisory Committee, and we have appointed 
Alfred Franzblau, M.D., Professor of Environmental Health Services, University of Michigan, to the 
Advisory Committee. 

Named Dr. Eden Wells as the Flint Drinking Water Public Health Advisor 


Boosted a Comprehensive Lead Education Program 


Other Updates 

• Dan Wyant was interviewed on October 6 by CBS Evening News during filter distribution in 
Flint. Questions asked were: 


2 



o Was it a mistake to go to Flint River water? 

Answer: We draw water from the surface waters; we treat it to safe drinking water 
standards. At issue is lead exposure. Lead exposure must be addressed. Actions are 
being taken to address the issue, 
o Did you put kids at risk? 

Answer: Lead exposure is a serious issue, and steps need to be taken to limit lead 
exposure. 

o Why did it take so long? 

Answer: DEQ has been there from the beginning addressing the issue of Flint 
water. Recent tests justify and require the actions taken. Action steps address short- 
term, intermediate, and long-term lead issues to ensure public safety and confidence of 
the drinking water. 

• Dan Wyant also spoke to the Governor about Flint funding needs. A meeting is scheduled for 
October 7 at 8:00 a.m. to further discuss proposals. 

• What we are telling Flint citizens is: 

o Have your water tested 

o Use only cold water for drinking, cooking, and preparing formula 
o Run water before use if it has not been used for several hours 
o Obtain a water filter approved for lead removal 
o Purchase lead-free plumbing components 
o Remove entire lead service lines 


3 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Emmitt, Beth (GOV) 

Tuesday, October 06, 2015 8:39 AM 
Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

FW: Flint Water updates 


Follow Up Flag: Follow up 

Flag Status: Completed 


From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2015 8:30 AM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV) < scott3l2@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Emmitt, Beth (GOV) < enimittb@michigan.gov >: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Agenj@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Re: Flint Water updates 

Yes. 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:23 AM, Scott, Allison (GOV) < scotta 1 2@.michi gan. gov > wrote: 

See below - DAN can your team assist with daily updates to GOV for his nightly briefing so he 
is not up to date. Your team would be responsible for collecting info from other depts involved 
etc 

Let me know if you have questions or concerns 

Thanks 

Thanks 

Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < Age nJ @m i chi g a n . go v> 

Date: October 6, 2015 at 8:20:24 AM EDT 

To: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" < scotta 1 2@michigan. go v > 

Cc: "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" <clemente @m i chi g a n . go v>. "Muchmore, 

Dennis (GOV)" < niuehmored@mi chi gan . gov > 

Subject: Re: Flint Water updates 

Update from Dan in briefing. Comms to also send update for briefing on stories or 
announcements upcoming. But Dan will have most accurate testing and analysis 
details to report. 


l 



On Oct 6, 2015, at 8: 14 AM, Scott, Allison (GOV) 

<scotta 1 2@miehig a n. g o y> wrote : 


What is most effective accurate rout? Dan provided update for 
briefing each day or does Comms shop speak to DEQ Comms and 
provide? 


Sent from my iPhone 


On Oct 6, 2015, at 8: 05 AM, Snyder, Rick (GOV) 


I 


wrote: 


We need a better update system re Flint Water. 


I saw in the press this am that DHHS announced 
yesterday that water filters would start being given 
out today. This should have come internally with 
more detail. I had press questions last night. 


Overall, we should have a daily report on Flint until 
our recommendations are fully implemented. 


For example: 

1. What are the water test results from the public 
schools? 

2. How many free test have been requested? How 
many have been done? How many remain and how 
long have they been waiting? What are the results - 
no lead, lead consistent with history, higher levels? 

3. How many fdters have been distributed? How 
many unfulfilled requests? 

4. New blood test results? Especially in the two zip 
codes. 

5. Analysis of tech advisory group 

6. Analysis of the GLWA vs. Flint River vs. KWA. 


Thanks 

Rick 


2 


Sent from my iPad 


3 



From: Kennedy, Jordan (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 6:48 PM 

To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

Subject: Revised Press Release 

Attachments: 151008 Flint water release_V2.docx 

Importance: High 

I'm sorry about alE of the confusion. Here's the updated PR. 

Jordan Kennedy 
Communications Representative 
Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 
Phone: 517.335.6397 



From: Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 6:46 PM 

To: Murray, David (GOV) <MurrayDl@michigan.gov>; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 
<Wurfels@michigan.gov>; Heaton, Anna (GOV) <HeatonA@michigan.gov>; Kennedy, Jordan (GOV) 
<KennedyJ4@michigan.gov>; Brown, Jessica (GOV) <BrownJ53@michigan.gov>; Paciorek, Josh (GOV) 
<Paciorekj@michigan.gov>; Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS) <lasherg@michigan.gov>; Minicuci, Angela (DHHS) 
<MinicuciA@michigan.gov>; Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS) <EisnerJ@michigan.gov>; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 
<Wurfels@michigan.gov>; Tommasulo, Karen (DEQ) <TommasuloK@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
<clemente@michigan.gov>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov>; Posthumus, Dick (GOV) 
<Posthumusd@michigan.go v>; Baird, Richard (GOV) <bairdr@michigan.gov>; Calley, Brian (GOV) 

Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV) <forstnernl@michigan.gov> 

Subject: RE: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 

See new version attached. Small revisions made and placeholders added for Mayor and Mott Foundation Quotes. 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 6:12 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michig3n.gov >; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < W u rf e i s @ m I c h i ga n . go v > ; Biehl, Laura (GOV) 
< BiehlL@michigan.gov >; Heaton, Anna (GOV) < H eaten A @ m i ch i ga n .go v > ; Kennedy, Jordan (GOV) 
< KennedyJ4@michigan.gov >; Brown, Jessica (GOV) < Bro wn J S 3 @ mjdhi ga n . go v > ; Paciorek, Josh (GOV) 
< Padorekj@mlehigan.goy >; Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS) < lasherg@roiehlaan.gov >; Minicuci, Angela (DHHS) 
< MinicudA@michjgan.gov >; Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS) < FisnerJ@michigan.gov >; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 
< Wurfels@mlchigan.goy >; Tommasulo, Karen (DEQ) < TommasuloK@mlchigan.gov >; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
< demente@michigan.gov >; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michigan.gov >; Posthumus, Dick (GOV) 
< Posthumusd@rnichlgan.gov >; Baird, Richard (GOV) < ba-rdr@michigan.gov >; Calley, Brian (GOV) 

Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV) < forstnernl@michigan.gov > 

Subject: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 


l 


Team, 


Please review this draft press release for the Thursday announcement in Flint. This incorporates some suggested edits to 
the strong draft from DEQ earlier today. 

Thank you very much. 

Gov. Rick Snyder: Move back to Detroit water provides 
best protection for public health in Flint 

State, Mott Foundation and city form partnership to fund switch 

FLINT, Mich. - Flint families and children will be better protected by reconnecting with the Great Lakes Water 
Authority as the source of the city’s drinking water, Gov. Rick Snyder said. 

Snyder said Thursday that he will request the state Legislature to provide a portion of the $12 million needed to 
reconnect with the authority, with the Flint city government providing $2 million and the Charles Stewart Mott 
Foundation donating $4 million. 

The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of Environmental Quality today 
also committed an additional $3.5 million for water filters, free lead testing through the state laboratory for Flint 
water customers, and hiring additional staff to conduct health exposure monitoring for lead in drinking water. 

Flint city leaders requested the state’s help to fund the reconnection after a Wednesday meeting of Flint’s 
Technical Advisory Committee. Flint’s move to the Great Lakes Water Authority is expected to cost about $1 .3 
million per month until the Karegnondi Water Authority is completed next summer. 

“All Flint residents need clean, safe drinking water,” Snyder said. “The technical experts helping the city on its 
water advisory all agree this move back to the Great Lakes Water Authority provides the best public health 
protection for children and families. This effort today is the result of people coming together to solve a problem. 

I appreciate Detroit’s willingness to reconnect with Flint, the Mott Foundation’s generous donation, and the 
dedication of all parties to come together to protect Flint families and children.” 

The move to Detroit water, which is drawn from Lake Huron, carries many public health benefits. As large 
bodies of water, the Great Lakes are naturally prone to fewer problems from large rain events and other runoff 
issues that can be present in shallower rivers. Additionally, the Great Lakes Water Authority has already fully 
optimized its corrosion control, using phosphates to help coat the insides of pipes and prevent lead from 
leaching into the water. 

However, reconnecting with the authority will not completely resolve the city’s problem with lead service lines 
or aging infrastructure. It will take time for pipes in Flint to become coated with the phosphate corrosion control. 
Additionally, some households in the city could experience lead in their drinking water until all lead pipes and 
plumbing are replaced. 

To best protect public health, Snyder said state and local authorities will continue to carry out steps outlined on 
Oct. 2 in a comprehensive action plan, including continued testing, the use of faucet filters and providing 
residents with accurate information about steps to eliminate lead in water. 

Free filters are available for current MDHHS clients at the 125 E. Union St. or 4809 Clio Road MDHHS office 
locations. 

For residents who are not currently enrolled in MDHHS assistance programs, free filters are available at the 
Genesee County Community Action Resource Department offices at 2727 Lippincott and 601 North Saginaw in 


2 



Flint. Staff will be at all four locations from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, to distribute filters and 
assist residents who have questions about proper installation. 

At the Lippincott location only, extended hours will be offered this weekend, including until 7 p.m. on Thursday 
and Friday and from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. on Saturday. 

Other good practices for residents concerned about lead include turning on the cold water tap and running the 
water until it’s as cold as it will go. Additionally, only use cold water for cooking, drinking and especially mixing 
baby formula. 

School test results released; more investigation planned 

The state today also released the first results from its lead screening program in schools and homes. Of 37 
total samples taken at 13 buildings, four samples spread over three buildings exceeded the federal action level 
of 15 parts per billion. 

However, this sampling provides only an initial screen, and the state is committing to further testing water and 
inspecting plumbing at these schools. Until testing is complete, schools are advised to continue using bottled 
water and filtration as a precaution to protect children. 

In addition, free testing is still available for any other Flint school, including daycares and Head Starts. Free 
testing is also available for any Flint resident. 

Additional information, including more detailed lead screening results, is available at 

\wvw. michlgan.gov/fllntwater . 

it a it 
TT7TTT 
It tt It 


Dave Murray 

Deputy Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 
517-335-6397, office 
Twitter: (©michigandmurray 



3 


RICK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 


State or Michigan 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE 

LANSING 


BRIAN GALLEY 

LT. GOVERNOR 


CONTACTS: 

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 

Sara Wurfel or Dave Murray 

Governor’s Office: 517-335-6397 

Thursday, Oct. 8, 2015 

Brad Wurfel. 517-284-6713 
Department of Environmental Quality 


Jennifer Eisner, 517-230-9804 
Department of Health and Human Services 



Gov. Rick Snyder: Move back to Detroit water 
provides best protection for public health in Flint 

State, Mott Foundation and city form partnership to fund switch 


FLINT, Mich. - Flint families and children will be better protected by reconnecting with the Great 
Lakes Water Authority as the source of the city’s drinking water, Gov. Rick Snyder said. 

Snyder said Thursday that he will request the state Legislature to provide half, or $6 million, of 
the $12 million needed to reconnect with the authority. The Flint city government will provide $2 
million and the Charles Stewart Mott Foundation will donate $4 million. 

“All Flint residents need clean, safe drinking water,” Snyder said. “The technical experts helping 
the city on its water advisory all agree this move back to the Great Lakes Water Authority 
provides the best public health protection for children and families. This effort today is the result 
of people coming together to solve a problem. I appreciate Detroit’s willingness to reconnect 
with Flint, the Mott Foundation’s generous donation, and the dedication of all parties to come 
together to protect Flint families and children.” 

The Michigan Departments of Environmental Quality and Health and Human Services today 
also committed an additional $3.5 million for water filters, free lead testing through the state 
laboratory for Flint water customers, and hiring additional staff to conduct health exposure 
monitoring for lead in drinking water. 

Flint city leaders requested the state’s help to fund the reconnection after a Wednesday meeting 
of Flint’s Technical Advisory Committee. Flint’s move to the Great Lakes Water Authority is 
expected to cost about $1.3 million per month until the Karegnondi Water Authority is completed 
next summer. 

INSERT MAYOR QUOTE HERE 

The move to Detroit water, which is drawn from Lake Huron, carries many public health 
benefits. As large bodies of water, the Great Lakes are naturally prone to fewer problems from 
large rain events and other runoff issues that can be present in shallower rivers. Additionally, 
the Great Lakes Water Authority has already fully optimized its corrosion control, using 
phosphates to help coat the insides of pipes and prevent lead from leaching into the water. 




However, reconnecting with the authority will not completely resolve the city’s problem with lead 
service lines or aging infrastructure. It will take time for pipes in Flint to become coated with the 
phosphate corrosion control. Additionally, some households in the city could experience lead in 
their drinking water until all lead pipes and plumbing are replaced. 

INSERT MOTT FOUNDATION QUOTE HERE 

To best protect public health, Snyder said state and local authorities will continue to carry out 
steps outlined on Oct. 2 in a comprehensive action plan, including continued testing, the use of 
faucet filters and providing residents with accurate information about steps to eliminate lead 
exposure. 

Free filters are available for current MDHHS clients at the 125 E. Union St. or 4809 Clio Road 
MDHHS office locations. For residents who are not currently enrolled in MDHHS assistance 
programs, free filters are available at the Genesee County Community Action Resource 
Department offices at 2727 Lippincott and 601 North Saginaw in Flint. Staff will be at all four 
locations from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, to distribute filters and assist residents 
who have questions about proper installation. At the Lippincott location only, extended hours will 
be offered this weekend, including until 7 p.m. on Thursday and Friday and from 10 a.m. to 2 
p.m. on Saturday. 

Other good practices for residents concerned about lead include turning on the cold water tap 
and running the water until it’s as cold as it will go. Additionally, only use cold water for cooking, 
drinking and especially mixing baby formula. 

School test results released; more investigation planned 

The state today also released the first results from its lead screening program in schools and 
homes. Of 37 total samples taken at 13 buildings, four samples spread over three buildings 
exceeded the federal action level of 15 parts per billion. 

However, this sampling provides only an initial screen, and the state is committing to further 
testing water and inspecting plumbing at these schools. Until testing is complete, schools are 
advised to continue using bottled water and filtration as a precaution to protect children. 

In addition, free testing is still available for any other Flint school, including daycares and Head 
Starts. Free testing is also available for any Flint resident. 

Additional information, including more detailed lead screening results, is available at 

www.michiqan.gov/flintwater . 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 


Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Wednesday, October 07, 2015 7:09 PM 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Dickinson, Sarah 
(GOV); Emmitt, Beth (GOV) 

Subject: Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT 

PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: City of Flint Water Funding Solution.pdf; FLINT SCHOOL TESTING RESULTS.DOCX; 

Drinking Water Regulations for Monitoring of Lead in Schools and Child C....doc; 
Response to Corrosion Control Questions.docx; Fwd: TAC Meeting Highlights; CC 
Meeting Minutes 3-25-2013 (l).doc; Flint.pdf; KWA Contract (amended) 130165.2. pdf 


Governor Snyder, 

I wanted to provide you with the attached documents to address a number of the questions that you 
are asking today. A full briefing for the press conference, including press release, talking points, run 
of show, and frequently asked questions, will be provided by your team. Included in this e-mail are 
the following attachments: 

1 . Flint Drinking Water FY 2016 supplemental budget request summary 

2. Summary of the Flint schools water testing results and our response to the results 

3. Drinking water regulations for monitoring lead in schools and child care centers 

4. Response to the questions on corrosion control 

5. Summary of today’s Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee meeting 

6. Flint City Council Minutes from March 25, 2013; the Resolution to Purchase Capacity from 
Karegnondi Water Authority; and the Amended Contract 



Mayor Duggan and Sue McCormick of DWSD were contacted, briefed, and are supporting 
tomorrow’s announcement. Both have indicated they would provide positive comments supporting 
the decision. 


Dan Wyant 



City of Flint Water - Funding Solution 
State of Michigan Commitment 


Agency 

i GF/GP : 

Gross ; 

j Comments 

l 

1 

I 

i i 

i l 

i I 

1 

1 

1 

l 

1 

1 

Filters: ; 

i i 

i i 

i i 

1 

1 

; 

i 

1 

Health & Human Services j 

j $1,016,000! 

$1,016,000! 

JAY15 work project 

1 

Health & Human Services j 

i so| 

1 1 

$ 1 , 000 , 000 ! 

!DEQ State Restricted Settlement Funds provided to HHS Emergency 
! 

jServices local office (FY16 appropriation). 

Subtotal Filters:! 

$1,016,000 1 

$2,016,000j 

1 

l 

i 

1 

1 1 
1 1 

1 

1 

l 

l 

i 

i 

; 

1 1 

1 1 

; i 

1 

1 

l 

1 

i 

Reconnect to DSW: ; 

1 

■ i 

■ i 

■ i 

■ i 

■ i 

i i 

■ 

1 

■ 

1 

1 

1 

i Reconnection costs ~$1.3m/month x 9 mos. to be shared by state & 
1 Flint 

Environmental Quality • 

: $5,000,000! 

$ 6 , 000 , 000 ! 

!DEQ State Restricted Settlement Fund of $lm; balance GF/GP 

Subtotal Reconnect:! 

$5,000,000| 

$6,000,000 1 

1 

1 

I 

1 1 
1 1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

Testing Costs: ' 

1 1 

1 

1 

Environmental Quality ; 

SI.OOO.OOOI 

$1,000,000! 

! Additional tests at state lab; cost per sample: $26 

Subtotal Testing:! 

$1,000,000! 

$ 1 , 000 , 000 ! 

1 

1 

1 

I 

1 1 
1 1 

i 

1 

1 

i 

1 

1 

Additional Agency Support: 

1 1 
1 1 
1 1 

1 

1 

■ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

LARA i 

1 

1 

1 

1 

! $0! 

1 1 

1 1 

j 1 

1 

1 

1 

$ 200 , 000 ! 

1 

1 

1 

■ Support for plumbing inspectors to do schools (public and parochial) and 
| health facilities (hospitals, Long Term Care, etc.). 

MSHDA 

$0! 

$249,900? 

1 

l 

Health & Human Services 

! $600,000! 

$600,000; 

(Follow-up on children with elevated blood levels 

Environmental Quality j 

$300.000j 

$300,000 j 

(Home and school inspections. 

Subtotal Additional Support:! 

$ 900 , 000 ! 

$1,349,900! 

1 

l 

i 

■ 

1 1 

1 1 

■ 

■ 

l 

1 

■ 

i 

1 1 

1 1 

■ 

1 

l 

l 

ALL TOTAL 

L L 

i $7,916,000! 

i I- 

$10,365,900: 

l 

l 

1 

J J 


5:52 PM 10/7/2015 


PRELIMINARY DRAFT 



FLINT SCHOOL TESTING RESULTS: 


WHAT DID WE FIND? 

1) The results of the initial screening conducted over the course of the last week are consistent with the 
last round of community lead and copper testing. 

2) There were a total of 37 samples taken from 13 schools. Of those 37 samples, 4 exceeded the 15 ppb 
action level. There were 3 schools that had samples exceeding the action level: Eisenhower Elementary 
(which had two samples exceeding 15 ppb). Brownell STEM Academy and Freeman Elementary each 
had one sample exceeding 15 PPB. The sample from Freeman Academy was significantly higher than 
the other samples at 101 PPB. 

3) Looking at the data from a health based perspective, the data clearly demonstrates that more 
detailed sampling needs to occur so that the various sources of lead contamination contained within 
each respective school's plumbing can be identified and addressed. 


WHAT DOES THE DATA MEAN? 

1) The data underscores the need for a complete and thorough evaluation of the plumbing system 
within each school. 

2) We have developed a protocol for evaluating the plumbing systems and we will be working with 
schools to implement these protocols and to assist them in determining a corrective action plan to 
address this issue. 

3) The State is identifying staff within DEQ, DHHS, LARA and Local County Health Departments to assist 
schools in conducting evaluations of their plumbing systems. 


WHAT IS YOUR PROTOCOL? 

1) DEQ's protocols are based on similar work done in Michigan and in other States. 

2) Multiple samples from each tap used for cooking or drinking water will be collected at prescribed 
intervals to identify levels of lead and its likely source. 

3) Once an evaluation is complete, we will be able to assist each School in developing a comprehensive 
plan to address issues on a site specific basis. 


HOW DO SCHOOLS RESPOND? 



1) Schools should continue protective measures that are currently in place until a complete study can be 
conducted at each school. This includes the continued use of bottled water for consumption purposes. 


2) We will be reaching out to schools to schedule a complete evaluation, assessment and sampling, of 
their plumbing systems. 



Drinking Water Regulations for Monitoring of Lead in Schools and Child Care Centers 


There is no federal or Michigan law requiring sampling of drinking water in schools that receive water from 
other public water systems, although schools that have their own water supply are subject to regulation and 
sampling as non-community public water systems. Schools served by a public water system may be included 
as a sampling site (i.e., tap) for a public water system’s lead and copper monitoring program if there are 
insufficient single-family homes that qualify. There are no federal requirements for more extensive testing. 

The 1986 Amendments to the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) required EPA to develop regulations to control 
for lead in drinking water. The Lead and Copper Rule (LCR), issued in 1991, is focused on controlling 
corrosion within the distribution system that delivers water to customers. The 1986 SDWA Amendments also 
required that only lead-free materials be used in new plumbing and in plumbing repairs. 

In 1988, the SDWA was further amended by the Lead Contamination Control Act (LCCA), to reduce the 
exposure of lead to children in schools and child care facilities. The LCCA prohibited the sale of any drinking 
water cooler that is not lead-free and required that: 

• the EPA identify each brand and model of drinking water cooler, indicating which are lead free and which 
have a lead-lined tank and distribute the list to states (SDWA Sec. 1463), 

• the Consumer Product Safety Commission order that manufacturers and importers of all drinking water 
coolers identified as having a lead-lined tank repair, replace, or recall and provide a refund for such coolers 
(SDWA Sec. 1462), 

• the EPA publish a guidance document and testing protocol to assist states in determining the source and 
degree of lead contamination in school drinking water (SDWA Sec. 1464), and 

• states establish programs to assist schools and child care facilities to test for and remedy lead contamination 
problems, with public availability of results of such testing (SDWA Sec. 1464(d)). 

As a result of a 1996 court decision, States are not required to establish testing programs. In its decision, the 
Fifth Circuit held that provisions in section 1464(d) were unconstitutional under the Tenth Amendment to the 
U.S. Constitution because they directly compelled the state to enact and enforce a federal regulatory program 
and provided no options for the State to decline the program. The decision did not, however, restrict states 
from developing and carrying out their own programs to assist schools. 

In 1989 and subsequent years, EPA released guidance and information to inform states and school systems 
how to test for and reduce the risk of lead exposure in school drinking water. EPA’s guidance provides a 
protocol for testing water in schools and recommends that schools take action at fixtures where the lead 
concentration exceeds 20 ppb. This concentration differs from the 15 ppb action level that public water 
systems are required to follow The 20 ppb action level is based on a smaller sample collection volume of 
250 milliliters (ml) and is designed to pinpoint specific fountains and outlets that require attention. 

In 1990, Michigan did provide schools and licensed child care centers with information to assist in testing and 
remedying potential lead contamination of their drinking water as required by the Lead Contamination Control 
Act of 1988. This information included a sampling protocol and guidance on flushing their system to minimize 
lead exposure. 

In 2004, EPA surveyed states to determine what additional programs may exist to control exposure to lead in 
drinking water at schools and child care centers. Forty-nine states, Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia and 
the Navajo Nation responded. Only 16 respondents indicated they have or will conduct special sampling or 
studies to target lead exposure at schools and child care centers. Michigan has not included any additional 
sampling programs or studies. Flowever, some local agencies have conducted voluntary programs. For 
example, the W.K, Kellogg Foundation funded a program implemented by the Calhoun County Health 
Department that sampled schools in Battle Creek. In Michigan’s response to this EPA survey, we included a 
recommendation for EPA to allow schools to be considered as a primary LCR monitoring site so that more 
information about lead levels in schools would become available. However, no changes in sampling criteria 
have occurred to date. 



In 2005, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the EPA, the Department of Education, the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the American Waterworks Association, the Association of 
Metropolitan Water Agencies, the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators, the National Association 
of Water Companies and the National Rural Water Association to facilitate actions that reduce children’s 
exposure to lead from drinking water at schools and child care facilities. 

Across the country and in Michigan, most schools and child care facilities receive water from other community 
water systems. However, those schools that have their own source of drinking water are considered non- 
transient non-community water systems and are subject to the LCR. In Michigan, there are 755 such schools 
and child care centers that must monitor for lead to demonstrate compliance. 



Response to Corrosion Control Questions 


- Lime Softening can affect the pH in water 

- The pH of the water is one physical characteristic that can affect the leaching of lead from pipes into 
the water 

- As per the requirements in the Lead/Copper rule the Flint Water system was evaluated for two 
consecutive monitoring periods and the results of the monitoring demonstrated that further action was 
necessary. 

- The DEQ promptly notified the Flint water system of the need for additional measures and the city of 
Flint promptly began putting together an action plan to address this need. 



From: 

Sent: 

Subject: 


Sygo, Jim (DEQ) 

Wednesday, October 07, 2015 6:00 PM 
Fwd: TAC Meeting Highlights 


Summary of advisory committee meeting 
Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Prysby, Mike (DEQ)" <PRY SB YM @m ich iga n, g o v> 

Date: October 7, 2015 at 4:56:44 PM EDT 
To: "Sygo, Jim (DEQ)" < S y go J @m i ch i ga n . go v> 

Subject: TAC Meeting Highlights 

Below is a summary of the Flint TAC meeting to obtain the committee's endorsement to switch 
back to Detroit water. 

1. The TAC endorses the switch back to the DWSD 

2. Marc Edwards of VA Tech supports the switchover to DWSD with conclusion that Flint River 
water with corrosion control will still be 4 times more corrosive 

than water from DWSD after 5 weeks of treatment. 

3. Genesee County states two weeks to prepare pipeline for re-use (flush, disinfect, sample, etc) 

4. Supplemental corrosion control still needed with DWSD water and ACT 399 submittal can be 
made in approx one week. 

5. No pros were brought to the table for staying on the Flint River. 

Sent from my iPhone 


l 



City of Flint, Michigan 

Third Floor, City Hall 
1101 S. Saginaw Street 
Flint, Michigan 48502 
www. cityofflint. com 



Meeting Minutes - Draft 

Monday, March 25, 2013 
5:33 PM 

Agenda amended to include Board of Hospital Managers appointments 

Council Chambers 

CITY COUNCIL 

Scott Kincaid, President, Ward 9 
Bryant W. Nolden, Vice President, Ward 3 

Claudia Croom, Ward 1 Jacqueline Poplar, Ward 2 

Joshua M. Freeman, Ward 4 Bernard Lawler, Ward 5 

Sheldon A. Neeley, Ward 6 Dale K. Weigh ill, Ward 7 

Michael J. Sarginson, Ward 8 


Inez M. Brown, City Clerk 




CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


CALL TO ORDER 

President Scott Kincaid called the meeting to order at 5:33 p.m. 

ROLL CALL 

Councilperson Michael Sarginson arrived at 5:37 p.m. 

Present: Councilperson: Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson 

Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
Kincaid, Councilperson Weighill and Councilperson Croom 

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE 

Councilperson Sheldon Neeley led the Pledge of Allegiance. 

SPECIAL ORDER 

130217 Special Order/Information & Discussion/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) 

A Special Order as requested by Council President Scott Kincaid to continue 
discussion and review of information on the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA). 


Presented 

PETITIONS AND UNOFFICIAL COMMUNICATIONS 

130193 Change to Digital/All Limited Basic Service Channels/Comcast Cablevision 

Communication dated March 6, 2013, from Gerald W. Smith, Government Affairs 
Manager, Comcast, to Flint City Clerk, re: On or shortly after April 9, 2013, Comcast 
will convert all Limited Basic service channels -- including Public, Government and 
Educational Access (PEG) channels to digital format, and will provide customers 
with digital equipment. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

130199 Certified Letter/Loyst Fletcher, Jr. & Associates 

Communication received from Loyst Fletcher, Jr. to Chief Legal Officer, re: He 
questions the tax-exempt status of Word of Life Christian Church, which received a 
tax bill from the city. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

130200 Local Approval Notice/Michigan Liquor Control Commission (MLCC)/Time 

Square/Ward 3 

Local Approval Notice dated March 14, 2013, from MLCC to Flint City Clerk, re: The 
MLCC has received a request to transfer all stock in 2012 Class C license with 
Sunday Sales Permit (PM) and Dance Permit, located at 4522 N. Saginaw, 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 1 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


Flint, Michigan, 48505, Genesee County, held by the estate of Myra Seals, Inc., 
1028 Cora Dr., Flint, Ml 48532, to Carisa Mays Bishop, Personal Representative. 
[NOTE: Approval order enclosed.] 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130202 Local Approval Notice/Michigan Liquor Control Commission (MLCC)/D & R Market, 

Inc./Ward 6 

Local Approval Notice dated March 6, 2013, and received March 15, 2013, from 
MLCC to Flint City Clerk, re: The MLCC has received an application from 2 AAR, 
LLC, requesting to Transfer Ownership of a Specially Designated Distributor (SDD) 
and Specially Designated Merchant (SDM) licensed business with Sunday Sales 
permit (PM) and Direct Connection-1 to D & R Market, Inc., located at 1402-1404 N. 
Chevrolet, Flint, Michigan, 48504, Genesee County, from 2 AAR, LLC, 3079 
Shattuck Arms Blvd., Apt. 5, Saginaw, Ml 48603. [NOTE: The application was 
cancelled pursuant to a request from an attorney.] 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130204 Changes/Cable Channel Lineup/Comcast Cablevision 

Communication dated March 18, 2013, from Gerald W. Smith, Government Affairs 
Manager, Comcast, to Flint City Clerk, re: effective on or about May 22, 2013, Fox 
Business Network/Fox Business Network HD (ch. 06/243) will from the Digital 
Preferred Service to the Digital Starter Service. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130205 Media Alert/Flint Public Art Project/Announcement of Design Winner 

Media Alert received via e-mail on March 19, 2013, from the American Institute of 
Architects (AIA), re: The Flint Public Art Project and the Flint Chapter of the AIA will 
announce the winner of the $25,000.00 grand prize in the inaugural Flat Lot 
competition to design and build a temporary summer pavilion on Flint's central 
downtown parking lot at 9:30 a.m. Thursday, March 21, 2013, at the John Gazall & 
Associates, Mott Building, 503 S. Saginaw Street, Flint. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130207 Damage Claims 

MAYFIELD, LINDA, 2518 Walter Street, Flint, Ml (WARD 2) 

LANE, WILLIE C., 3130 Concord Street, Flint, Ml (WARD 6) 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

COMMUNICATIONS FROM CITY OFFICIALS 

130194 Press Release/City of Flint/Hiring of New Police Officers/Recruitment of Others 

Press Release dated March 11, 2013, from Jason Lorenz, City of Flint Public 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 2 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130195 


130196 


130201 


130203 


Information Officer, re: The City of Flint has seven new police officers on the job 
from the public safety millage passed last November by voters. The city's next step 
is to hold a recruitment drive by working with a local college, which will set up a 
Police Academy when the city has gathered sufficient interest from its efforts. 


This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


Press Release/City of Flint/Sunday Sales of Alcohol Before Noon Not Permitted on 
St. Patrick's Day 

Press Release dated March 12, 2013, from Jason Lorenz, City of Flint Public 
Information Officer, re: The City of Flint will not be able to permit Sunday alcohol 
sales before noon this Sunday, March 17, St. Patrick's Day. While the city adopted 
a resolution to allow a one-time exception to the Sunday morning alcohol ban, the 
Michigan Liquor Control Commission has taken the position that the city cannot 
create a one-day exemption. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


Flint City Council/Public Notice/Special City Council Meeting/March 18, 2013 

Public Notice posted March 14, 2013, re: The Flint City Council will hold a Special 
City Council Meeting, followed by a Finance Committee Meeting, at 5:30 p.m. 
Monday, March 18, 2013, in the City Council Chambers, 3rd Floor, City Hall, to 
consider a contract with the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA). 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

Emergency Financial Manager (EFM) Order #1 0/Grant Applications 

Order #10 issued by Emergency Financial Manager on March 15, 2013, "Grant 
Applications," re: "all city officials, department heads, division heads and employees 
shall adhere to ...requirements regarding the approval of any and all grant 
applications on behalf of the City of Flint or grant applications submitted by others 
which in any way involves the financial, programmatic or personnel support by the 
City of Flint." The five requirements, including the stipulation that only the 
Emergency Financial Manager or City Administrator are authorized to accept grants 
on behalf of the city, are included in the order. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


Press Release/City of Flint/Flint Lifelines/Meeting Announcement 

Press Release dated March 16, 2013, from Jason Lorenz, City of Flint Public 
Information Officer, re: Flint Lifelines, formerly CeaseFire Flint, will hold community 
meetings on the fourth Thursday of each month, beginning at 1 p.m. Thursday, 
March 28, 2013 at Flint Northwestern High School. The meetings are open to the 
public. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 3 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130206 Flint City Council/Public Notice/Finance Committee Meeting/March 20, 201 3 

Public Notice posted March 19, 2013, re: The Flint City Council will hold a Finance 
Committee Meeting at 5:30 p.m. Wednesday, March 20, 2013, in the City Council 
Committee Room, 3rd Floor, City Hall. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130208 Flint City Council/Public Notice/Special Affairs Committee Meeting/March 25, 2013 

Public Notice posted March 22, 2013, re: The Flint City Council will hold a Special 
Affairs Committee Meeting at 5 p.m. Monday, March 25, 2013, in the City Council 
Committee Room, 3rd Floor, City Hall. A regular City Council meeting will 
immediately follow in the Council Chambers. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130209 Traffic Engineering/Note for Bulletin/Street-Sidewalk-Lane Closures 

Notes for Bulletin (3) dated February/March 2013, for street, sidewalk, or lane 
closures, re: (1) Harrison Street, Saginaw Street and Second Avenue (cable 
failure-March 11-March 20); (2) First Street, Harrison Street, Wallenberg, Kearsley, 
Crapo, Horrigan, and Harrison (St. Patrick's Day Pot O' Gold 4-Mil Run/Walk-March 
17); and (3) Chevrolet Avenue (University Corner Grand Opening-March 22). 


This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

Passed The Consent Agenda 

A motion was made. The motion carried. 

PUBLIC SPEAKERS 
ROLL CALL 

Councilperson Dale Weighill left at approximately 1 p.m. 

Present: Councilperson: Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson 

Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: Councilperson: Councilperson Weighill 


APPOINTMENTS 

130169.1 Amendment/Reappointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/Christine Monk (Ward 6) 

Amended resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the 
reappointment of Christine Monk (821 Frank Street, Flint Ml 48504 - Ward 6), to 
the Zoning Board of Appeals for a three-year term, commencing September 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 4 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130211 


130212 


130213 


1 , 201 1 , and expiring September 1 , 2014. [By way of background, Ms. Monk's term 
on the Zoning Board of Appeals expired in September 201 1 , but she has continued 
since that time to serve.] [Resolution amended to fix typographical error in first 
paragraph of resolution from "Board of Review" to "Zoning Board of Appeals."] 


Sponsors: Sheldon A. Neeley 

A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Appointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/Chris Zuwala (Ward 4) 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the appointment of 
Chris Zuwala (3510 Whittier Avenue, Flint Ml 48506 - Ward 4) to the Zoning Board 
of Appeals for a three-year term, expiring September 1, 2013. [NOTE: By way of 
background, Gloria Kelly's term as the 4th Ward representative expired in 
September 2007, but she continued to serve until resigning in January 2013.] 


Sponsors: Joshua M. Freeman 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Councilperson Poplar, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Reappointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/Birdie V. Brooks (Ward 5) 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the reappointment of 
Birdie V. Brooks (1307 Columbia Lane, Flint Ml 48503 - Ward 5), to the Zoning 
Board of Appeals for the remainder of a three-year term, expiring September 1 , 
2014. [Byway of background, Ms. Brook's term on the Zoning Board of Appeals 
expired in September 201 1 , but she has continued since that time to serve.] 


Sponsors: Bernard Lawler 

A motion was made by Councilperson Lawler, seconded by Councilperson Neeley, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 5 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130214 


130215 


Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the reappointment of 
Marcia Braden (984 Barney Avenue, Flint Ml 48503 - Ward 8), to the Zoning 
Board of Appeals for the remainder of a three-year term, expiring September 1 , 
2014. [By way of background, Ms. Braden's term on the Zoning Board of Appeals 
expired in September 201 1 , but she has continued since that time to serve.] 


Sponsors: Michael J. Sarginson 

A motion was made by Councilperson Sarginson, seconded by Councilperson 
Freeman, that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Reappointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/David C. Veasley (Ward 9) 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the reappointment of 
David C. Veasley (261 8 Pinetree Drive, Flint Ml 48507 - Ward 9), to the Zoning 
Board of Appeals for the remainder of a three-year term, expiring September 1 , 
2015. [Byway of background, Mr. Veasley's term on the Zoning Board of Appeals 
expired in September 2009, but he has continued since that time to serve ] 


Sponsors: Scott Kincaid 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Appointment/Genesee County Land Bank Citizens' Advisory Council/Anthony 
Tucker (Ward 4) 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the appointment of 
Anthony Tucker (2960 Henry Street, Flint Ml 48506 - Ward 4) to the Genesee 
County Land Bank Citizens' Advisory Council for the remainder of a three-year 
term, expiring in January 2016. [NOTE: By way of background, Dan Anderson's 
term as the 4th Ward representative expired in January 2013.] 

Sponsors: Joshua M. Freeman 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Councilperson Poplar, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 6 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130218 


130219 


130220 


Reappointment/Hurley Board of Hospital Managers/Philip W. Shaltz 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council approves the reappointment of Philip 
W. Shaltz (14144 Moffet Drive, Fenton, Ml 48430) to an additional five-year term on 
the (Hurley) Board of Hospital Managers, with such term to commence May 1, 

2013, and expire April 30, 2018. 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Appointment/Hurley Board of Hospital Managers/Delrico Loyd 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council approves the appointment of Delrico 
Loyd (2641 Westwood Parkway, Flint, Ml 48507) to a five-year term on the (Hurley) 
Board of Hospital Managers, with such term to commence May 1, 2013, and expire 
April 30, 2018. [By way of background, Carl E. Mason was appointed in June 2008; 
his term expires April 30, 2013.] 

Approved 

Substituted 

A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Lawler, 
that this matter be POSTPONED for March 27, 2013. The motion failed by the 
following vote: 

Aye: 3 - Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley and Councilperson Sarginson 

No: 5 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Substituted 

A motion was made by Vice President Nolden, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 5 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

No: 3 - Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley and Councilperson Sarginson 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Appointment/Hurley Board of Hospital Managers/Donna Poplar 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council approves the appointment of Donna 
Poplar (5277 Kimberly Woods Circle, Flint, Ml 48504) to a five-year term 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 7 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


on the (Hurley) Board of Hospital Managers, with such term to commence May 1, 
2013, and expire April 30, 2018. [Byway of background, Frances Gilcreastwas 
appointed in August 2008; her term expires April 30, 2013.] 

Approved 

Substituted 

A motion was made by Councilperson Lawler, seconded by Councilperson Neeley, 
that this matter be POSTPONED for March 26, 2013. The motion carried by the 
following vote: 

Aye: 7 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Lawler, 

Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and 
Councilperson Croom 

No: 1 - Councilperson Freeman 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

RESOLUTIONS 

130165.1 Amended Resolution/Contract/City of Flint/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) 

Amended resolution resolving that city officials are authorized to enter into a 
contract with Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) to purchase fifteen (15) units of 
capacity, AND, resolving that the City Administrator is authorized to provide KWA 
information needed to administer the contract, and, with approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. [NOTE: For 
each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer shall pay to the KWA a 
one-time fee of $32,300. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the KWA not less than 
$32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated 
amount NOT-TO-EXCEED $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the 
bonds are paid in full. If it is determined that the costs per unit will exceed 
$355,300.00, the buyer has a right to cancel the contract. Over the next 25 years, it 
is expected that continuing with Detroit will cost the region $2.1 billion, compared to 
$1.9 billion with a pipeline.] [NOTE: Contract not included.] [NOTE: Resolution 
amended from 18 to 15 units of capacity.] 


A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, 
that this matter be Amended. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 5 - Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, 

Councilperson Neeley and Councilperson Sarginson 

No: 3 - Councilperson Poplar, President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

130165.2 Amended Resolution/Contract/City of Flint/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) 

Amended resolution resolving that city officials are authorized to enter into a 
contract with Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) to purchase sixteen (16) units 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 8 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130216 


130216.1 


of capacity, AND, resolving that the City Administrator is authorized to provide KWA 
information needed to administer the contract, and, with approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. [NOTE: For 
each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer shall pay to the KWA a 
one-time fee of $32,300. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the KWA not less than 
$32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated 
amount NOT-TO-EXCEED $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the 
bonds are paid in full. If it is determined that the costs per unit will exceed 
$355,300.00, the buyer has a right to cancel the contract. Over the next 25 years, it 
is expected that continuing with Detroit will cost the region $2.1 billion, compared to 
$1.9 billion with a pipeline.] [NOTE: Contract not included.] [NOTE: Resolution 
amended from 15 to 16 units of capacity.] 


A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, 
that this matter be Adopted. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 7 - Councilperson Poplar, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, 

Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and 
Councilperson Croom 

No: 1 - Vice President Nolden 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Approval/The First Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the Downtown 
Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint 

Resolution that the City of Flint hereby approves and The First Amendment & 
Restated Rules Governing the Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the 
City of Flint, attached hereto. [NOTE: The City of Flint created the DDA, in 
accordance with Public Act 1 97 of 1 975, as amended, and approved The Rules 
Governing the DDA in 1977. Public Act 197 has been amended and revised at 
various times since then, which required the proposed changes.] [NOTE: The First 
Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the Downtown Development Authority 
(DDA) of the City of Flint is attached.] 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, 
that this matter be Amended. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Amended Resolution/Approval/The First Amendment & Restated Rules Governing 
the Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint 

Amended resolution that the City of Flint hereby approves and The First 
Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the Downtown Development Authority 
(DDA) of the City of Flint, attached hereto. [NOTE: The City of Flint created the 
DDA, in accordance with Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended, and approved The 
Rules Governing the DDA in 1977. Public Act 197 has been 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 9 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


amended and revised at various times since then, which required the proposed 
changes.] [NOTE: The First Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the 
Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint is attached.] 

[Resolution amended for changes to rules.] 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, 
that this matter be Adopted. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

RESOLUTIONS - MAY BE REFERRED FROM S.A. 

130210 Resolution/City Council/Mayor Dayne Walling/Request for Appointment of 

Transition Advisory Board 

Resolution resolving that Mayor Dayne Walling and the Flint City Council request 
and recommend to Gov. Rick Snyder that a receivership transition advisory board 
be appointed for the City of Flint under Public Act 436 no later than July 1 , 201 3. 
[NOTE: On December 1, 2011, Gov. Snyder appointed Michael K. Brown as 
Emergency Manager under Public Act 4 for the City of Flint, due in part to a 
consistent deficit in the general fund, the decline in pooled cash, budget issues and 
unfunded liabilities for post-employment benefits. Due to the suspension and 
subsequent repeal of Public Act 4, Gov. Snyder appointed Edward J. Kurtz as 
Emergency Financial Manager under Public Act 72 for the City of Flint, effective 
August 9, 2012. Both the Emergency Manager and the subsequently appointed 
Emergency Financial Manager were authorized by virtue of their appointment to 
“act for and in the place and stead of the governing body and the office of chief 
administrative officer of the City of Flint.” On March 28, 2013, Public Act 436 will 
become effective and provides that an emergency financial manager appointed and 
serving under state law immediately prior to the effective date shall continue to 
serve as an emergency manager under Public Act 436. As an alternative to 
continuation of an emergency manager, and if the financial emergency has been 
rectified, Public Act 436 authorizes the governor to appoint a receivership transition 
advisory board, which serves at the pleasure of the governor and monitors the 
affairs of the local government until the receivership is terminated.] 


No vote was taken on this amendment. 

Amended 


130210.1 Amended Resolution/City Council/Mayor Dayne Walling/Request for Appointment 
of Transition Advisory Board 

Amended resolution resolving that Mayor Dayne Walling and the Flint City Council 
request and recommend to Gov. Rick Snyder that a receivership transition advisory 
board be appointed for the City of Flint under Public Act 436 no later than July 1 , 
2013. [NOTE: On December 1 , 201 1 , Gov. Snyder appointed Michael K. Brown as 
Emergency Manager under Public Act 4 for the 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 10 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


City of Flint, due in part to a consistent deficit in the general fund, the decline in 
pooled cash, budget issues and unfunded liabilities for post-employment benefits. 
Due to the suspension and subsequent repeal of Public Act 4, Gov. Snyder 
appointed Edward J. Kurtz as Emergency Financial Manager under Public Act 72 
for the City of Flint, effective August 9, 201 2. Both the Emergency Manager and 
the subsequently appointed Emergency Financial Manager were authorized by 
virtue of their appointment to “act for and in the place and stead of the governing 
body and the office of chief administrative officer of the City of Flint.” On March 28, 
2013, Public Act 436 will become effective and provides that an emergency 
financial manager appointed and serving under state law immediately prior to the 
effective date shall continue to serve as an emergency manager under Public Act 
436. As an alternative to continuation of an emergency manager, and if the financial 
emergency has been rectified, Public Act 436 authorizes the governor to appoint a 
receivership transition advisory board, which serves at the pleasure of the governor 
and monitors the affairs of the local government until the receivership is 
terminated.] [Six-page resolution amended for changes proposed by City Council, 
City Clerk and Mayor Dayne Walling.] 


A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Councilperson Poplar, 
that this matter be Adopted. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

MEETING SCHEDULE 
ADDITIONAL COUNCIL DISCUSSION 
ADJOURNMENT 

Having no further business, Council President Scott Kincaid adjourned the meeting at 8:59 
p.m. 

Respectfully transcribed and submitted, 

Janell Johnson. Administrative Secretary to Citv Council 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 11 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





BY THE EMERGENCY MANAGER: 


EM SUBMISSION NO. : SLQt3£MQ <// 
PRESENTED ! 3 1 3 

ADOPTED: 




RESOLUTION TO PURCHASE CAPACITY FROM 
KAREGNONDI WATER AUTHORITY 


The Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) is a governmental consortium of cities and 
counties in southeastern Michigan that was created to build a water pipeline that will provide 
water from Lake Huron to interested communities in Sanilac, Lapeer, and Genesee counties. 
The incorporating bodies that created the KWA are Sanilac County, Lapeer County, Genesee 
County, the City of Flint, and the City of Lapeer. 

The City of Flint is currently in a year to year contract with the City of Detroit for the 
purchase of water. A study was conducted that projected that staying with Detroit will cost the 
region $2.1 billion over the next 25 years. In contrast, if the region builds its own pipeline, the 
projected costs are $1.9 billion over the same period. After the initial 25 year period, the 
projected costs would be less then 25% of the projected water costs from Detroit. 

In order to build the pipeline, the KWA needs commitment from its members regarding 
the capacity that each member will purchase in the pipeline. The KWA is allowed to withdraw 
85 million gallons of water per day. Capacity is available to members in increments of 1 million 
gallons per day known as units. For each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer 
shall pay to the KWA a one time fee of $32,300.00. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the 
KWA not less then $32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated amount not 
to exceed $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the bonds are paid in full. If it is 
determined that the costs per unit will exceed $355,300.00 the buyer has a right to cancel the 
contract. 

The purchase of capacity along with the payment of other costs necessary to operate the 
pipeline gives the member a right to water for sale to its customers. The buyer has a right to 
resell capacity and water rights. Each party entering into a capacity contract shall also be 
entitled to appoint additional board members equal to the party’s percentage share of the total 
capacity under contract. 

It is in the long term best interests of the City of Flint to enter into a contract with the 
KWA to purchase up to eighteen (1 8) units of capacity. 



IT IS RESOLVED that City officials are authorized to enter into a contract with KWA 
to purchase up to eighteen ( 18 ) units of capacity. 

IT IS FURTHER RESOLVED that the City Administrator is authorized to provide 
KWA information needed to administer the contract and, vvitli approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. 



ENACT \/ FAIL 



Edward L. Kurtz, Enter 


APPROVED AS TO FINANCE: 



^^-Gerald Ambrose, Finance Director 


dated 


SAP. Bnde\E|Vf20 ! 3\Resolutio»s\KWA.03.28. 1 3.doc 


Flint City Council approves resolution to buy water from Karegnondi, state approval still ... Page 1 of 2 


Flint 


Flint City Council approves resolution to buy water 
from Karegnondi, state approval still needed 


J ) [httpiffconnacl.mllve.comistaff/dadamsl/lndex.html] By Dominic Adams | dadams5@mllvo.com thltp://conncct.mllv».com/staffWadams1/posts.htmlJ 
/ Follow on Twitter [http:tfwww.twltter.com/doniln1cadams] 

%i ' on March 25. 2013 at 10:45 PM, updated March 26, 2013 at 1:23 AM 

FLINT, MI - Flint is one step closer to getting its water from Lake Huron as part of the Karegnondi Water Authority. 

The vote, approved 7-1 at tire Flint City Council meeting Monday, March 25 

[http://w%vTv.mlive,com/ne\vs/flint/index,ssf/20i3/o3/flint_citj r _council_again_delay.litml] , may have set in motion the 
end to Flint paying to get its water from Detroit. 

Under the proposal, Flint would get 16 million gallons per day of raw water from Lake Huron, pipe it to Flint for treatment and then sell it 
to customers throughout the city. Another 2 million gallons per day would come from the Flint River and wilt be treated in Flint, 

Mayor Dayne Walling said the Department of Environmental Quality must approve Flint’s getting 2 million gallons per day from the Flint 
River. 

Tuesday’s meeting followed weeks of discussions and special meetings surrounding the resolution. 

“We got there,” Councilman Joshua Freeman said. “That’s the important thing.” 

There were more than 50 people at Monday’s meeting. 

“Going with Karegnondi is the best decision. We have no opinion on the economics of the decision,” said Rebecca Fedewa, Flint River 
Watershed Coalition executive director. “If we start drawing water out of the Fiint River, we are at risk of having to start releasing w'ater 
from our reservoirs.” 

Genesee County Drain Commissioner Jeff Wright said the decision must still be approved by a count}' water and waste advisory board. The 
KWA board will then be reconvened for final approval. 

Wright said construction could start in May. 

State treasuiy officials still must approve the city council's move because Flint has an emergency financial manager. All expenditures over 
$50,000 must be approved. 

Genesee County Drain Commissioner Jeff Wright has said that Flint would pay roughly $6.4 million annually for water service if it joined 
the pipeline - a nearly $4 million savings on what it pays Detroit for water. 

Walling previously said the city would save $19 million over eight years 

[http://www.nilive.coin/news/fllnt/index, ssf/20i3/o3/flint_city_council_delays_deci.html] by getting water from the 
KWA. 

"It’s a historic night in the City of Flint,” Walling said. “The savings will be less with the capacity level approved by city council because 
there will be increased treatment cost for the river water.” 

He said the DEQ told the city it needed to get 18 million gallons per day or there would have to be additional work done at Flint’s water 
plant. 

Flint’s water plant and the Flint River is currently the backup for Flint and Genesee County, however, the plant only operates four times 
per year. 

Councilman Bryant Nolden was the lone dissenting vote. 


http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2013/03/flint_city_council_approves_re.html 


10/7/2015 



Flint City Council approves resolution to buy water from Karegnondi, state approval still ... Page 2 of 2 


“It was a protest vote,” Nolden said. “I knew they had enough votes. I just feel like the Flint River is our best option.” 

Karengnondi is the regional water authority that includes Genesee, Lapeer and Sanilac counties and the cities of Flint and Lapeer. 

Flint is the second municipality, behind Genesee County, to officially decide to purchase raw water through the KWA. Lapeer city officials 
said they intend to purchase water, but an agreement has been finalized. 

Dominic Adams is a reporter for MLive-FIint Journal. Contact him at dadams5@mlive.c0m or 810-241-8803. Follow him on 
Twitter [http://ioww.twitter.com/domimcadamsj , Facebook [httji://ivwiv Jacebook.com/dominic.adams.1865] or 
Google+ [https;/ /plus. google.com/1036906725068087299119rel-author] . 

IS 


Related Stories 


Price of Detroit water for Flint is $1 .5 
million a month, mayor says 


lhUp://www.mlive.corn/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/10/mayor_city_ad 




Here’s how that toxic lead gets into Flint 
water 


(http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/10/see_step_by_; 


Registration on or use of this silo constitutes acceptance of our User Ag reement and Privacy Policy 
© 2015 Mltve Media Group All rights reserved (About Us). 

The materia! on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Mltve 
Media Group 

Community Rules appty to all content you upload or othervrise submit to this site. Contact interactivity management. 

Ad Choices 


http://v\ r ww.mlive.coni/news/flint/index,ssf/2013/03/flint_city_council_approves_re,htnil 


10/7/2015 




$ ~GOUNTY | 

GENESEE COUNTY DRAIN COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE 

GENESEE COUNTY 

I fcjfcjlreia | 

JEFFREY WRIGHT 

mmm 

iDRAfN COMMJ6 SJONBr| 

COMMISSIONER 

OFtAfN COMMISSfONER 


G-4608 BEECHER ROAD, FLINT, Ml 48532 
PHONE (810) 732-1590 FAX (810) 732-1474 


FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE CONTACT: Jeff Wright 

March 26, 2013 810-287-1925 


What: Jeff Wright Statement on Flint City Council Approving Resolution to Join KWA. 
When: March 26, 2013 


Additional Info: Jeff Wright, CEO of the KWA, today praised the Flint City Council for voting to approve 
a resolution to officially have the City of Flint join the KWA and its' water line, 

"I have said from the beginning that this decision must be made by Flint's City Council and Mayor," said 
Wright. "I appreciate the council voting the way they did, but even more than that, I am glad the 
residents of Flint were able to have their voices heard via their elected officials." The next step in the 
process will come with the KWA Board executing the contract for the City. 

"The most important aspect from the vote is the fact that we as an Authority can move forward 
knowing Flint's intentions," said Wright. 

Despite Emergency Manager Ed Kurtz publicly supporting the project, Wright had made a vote by 
council a condition of Flint joining the KWA so the residents would have their say. 

"There is a basic tenet that government is best when it has local control. We saw that with the council 
vote. Nobody, whether they live in Flint, Grand Blanc, Davison, Fenton, or anywhere in Genesee County, 
should have these types of decisions made by people who live outside of their community," said Wright. 

At the next Water and Waste Advisory Board meeting a vote will be taken to award a contract for 
construction of the intake portion of the water line. All bids were submitted to the board at their last 
meeting for review. 




RtCK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 


State of Michigan 
DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY 
Lansing 


ANDY DILLON 
STATE TREASURER 


Mr. Edward Kurtz April 11,2013 

Emergency Manager 
City of Flint 

1 101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 

Dear Mr. Kurtz: 

Thank you for your March 29, 2013 letter, which is attached for reference. As the Emergency 
Manager for the City of Flint (“Flint” or “City”), you have asked for my concurrence, pursuant to 
Public Act 436 of 2012, the Local Financial Stability and Choice Act, to authorize a contract in 
excess of $50,000.00 not subject to competitive bidding. This request was related to the City 
entering into an agreement with the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) for provision of raw 
water for the City. 

In considering your request, I took note of the following facts in support of Flint joining KWA. 
First, there is widespread support in the City for this move, including the support of the Mayor, 
the City Council, and the Emergency Manager. Second, this move will provide a unique 
opportunity for the City and County to partner on an important project, which will hopefully lead 
to future regional collaboration. Third, the Department of Environmental Quality is supportive of 
the City participating in the KWA project. Finally, your representations that this deal will lead to 
substantial savings for the City over the coming decades, savings that are desperately needed to 
help with the turnaround of the City of Flint. 

It is my understanding that the Detroit Water and Sewer Department is making a final best offer 
to Genesee County and the City of Flint next Monday, April 1 5, 2013. As such, this approval 
will be effective at 5 pm on April 16, 2013 after receiving written notice from the City that either 
no such offer was presented to the county and the City or that an offer was received and was 
rejected in good faith based upon specified objections. 

For the reasons described above and subject to the conditions set forth herein, pursuant to 
Section 12 (3) of PA 436 of 2012, 1 am authorizing you to proceed with adopting the resolution 
and entering into a contract with KWA. 



P.O, SOX 30716 * LANSING, MICHIGAN 48909 
www.michlgan.gov/treasury> (517) 373-3200 



Flint council supports buying water from Lake Huron through KWA | MLive.com 


Page 1 of 1 


Flint 


Flint council supports buying water from Lake Huron 
through KWA 


gl [http://connect.mllYe.com/staffldadams1/lnd8X.htnil] By Dominic Adams | dadams5@mllvs.com [hltp://connect.mllve.com/staff/dadams1/posts.h(ml] 
•¥> Follow on Twitter [http://www.twltter.com/domlnlcadams] 
lv ‘ on Mart* 25, 2013 at 7:17 PM, updated March 26, 2013 at 7:43 AM 

FLINT, MI — Flint residents may soon get their water from Lake Huron. 


The Flint City Council voted 7-1 to get 16 million gallons per day from the Karegnondi Water Authority. 


"This is about compromise," said Councilman Sheldon Neeley. 


Neeley got support from Councilman Joshua Freeman, after the two were previously at odds about the amount the city should withdraw 
from Lake Huron. 

Councilman Bryant Nolden was the lone "no" vote. 


"It was a protest vote," Nolden said. "I just feel like the Flint River is our best option." 

Genesee County Drain Commissioner said construction of the pipeline could start in May. 

The city currently pays to get its water from Detroit. 

State treasury officials still must approve the city council's move because Flint has an emergency financial manager. All expenditures over 
$50,000 must be approved. 

Dominic Adams is a reporter for MLive-Flint Journal Contact him at dadams5@mlive.c07n or 810-341-8803. Follow him on 
Tiuitter [http://ioiow.tioitter.com/dominicadams] , Facebook [http://wwwJdcebook.com/dominic.adams.1865] or 
Google+ [https://plus.googie.com/10369067250680872991rtrefcauthov ] . 


Related Stories 



Enbridge can begin piping tar sands oil 
along Lake Ontario north shore 



Former Detroit American Motors Corp. 
headquarters being auctioned; starting bid 
$500 


[http://wvw.mlive.com/news/index.ssf/201 5/1 0/enbridge_can_beg 


[http://www,mlive,com/news/detroit/index.ssf/201 5/1 0/former_detn 


Registration on or use oF this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement and Privacy Policy 
©2015 MLtve Media Group A5! rights reserved (About Us), 

The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the priorwritten permission of MLive 
Media Group 

Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site. Contact Interactivity management. 

[> Ad Choices 


http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2013/03/flint_city_council_again_delay.htnil 


10/7/2015 




Resolution: 


130165.2 

Presented: 3 - 11-13 

Adopted: 3 - 25-13 


AMENDED RESOLUTION TO PURCHASE CAPACITY 
FROM KAREGNONDI WATER AUTHORITY 


BY THE MAYOR: 

The Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) is a governmental consortium of cities and 
counties in southeastern Michigan that was created to build a water pipeline that will provide 
water from Lake Huron to interested communities in Sanilac, Lapeer, and Genesee counties. 
The incorporating bodies that created the KWA are Sanilac County, Lapeer County, Genesee 
County, the City of Flint, and the City of Lapeer. 

The City of Flint is currently in a year to year contract with the City of Detroit for the 
purchase of water. A study was conducted that projected that staying with Detroit will cost the 
region $2.1 billion over the next 25 years. In contrast, if the region builds its own pipeline, the 
projected costs are $1.9 billion over the same period. After the initial 25 year period, the 
projected costs would be less then 25% of the projected water costs from Detroit. 

In order to build the pipeline, the KWA needs commitment from its members regarding 
the capacity that each member will purchase in the pipeline. The KWA is allowed to withdraw 
85 million gallons of water per day. Capacity is available to members in increments of 1 million 
gallons per day known as units. For each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer 
shall pay to the KWA a one time fee of $32,300.00. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the 
KWA not less then $32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated amount not 
to exceed $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the bonds are paid in full. If it is 
determined that the costs per unit will exceed $355,300.00 the buyer has a right to cancel the 
contract. 

The purchase of capacity along with the payment of other costs necessary to operate the 
pipeline gives the member a right to water for sale to its customers. The buyer has a right to 
resell capacity and water rights. Each party entering into a capacity contract shall also be 
entitled to appoint additional board members equal to the party’s percentage share of the total 
capacity under contract. 

The City of Flint has decided that it is in its long term best interests to enter into a 
contract with the KWA to purchase SIXTEEN (16) units of capacity, plus TWO (2) units from 
the Flint River. 



IT IS RESOLVED that City officials are authorized to enter into a contract with KWA 
to purchase SIXTEEN (16) units of capacity, plus TWO (2) units from the Flint River. 

IT IS FURTHER RESOLVED that the City Administrator is authorized to provide 
KWA information needed to administer the contract and, with approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. 


APPROVED AS TO FORM: 



APPROVED AS TO FINANCE: 


Gerald Ambrose 
Finance Director 


APPROVED BY MAYOR: 


Dayne Walling 
Mayor 


APPROVED BY CITY COUNCIL 
ON: March 25. 2013 

Inez Brown /J 
Clerk, City of Flint 


APPROVED BY 
CITY COUNCIL 

MAR 25 2013 

■•A :L>v 


S:\JP\Ordinances and Resos\KWA.03.08.13.doc 


From: 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: 

Thursday, October 08, 2015 5:40 PM 

To: 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Dickinson, Sarah 
(GOV); Emmitt, Beth (GOV); Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

Cc: 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Subject: 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT 
PRIVILEGED 

Importance: 

High 


Dear Governor, 

Below are our 26 action steps we are working on: 

26 Action Steps for Next Week, October 12-16, 2015 

1 . Identify schools and prioritize for assessment 

2. Get DLARA plumbers organized 

3. Complete sampling instructions 

4. MDARD info for restaurants 

5. Update 2004 letter to EPA 

6. Approve Flint plan for water line 

7. Lead education plan for schools for Drinking Water 

8. Begin regular meetings with Flint 

9. Schedule WTP tour 

10. Meet with schools and DLARA-invitation only 

1 1 . Update Web page 

12. Contact DFIHS to see where they are with United Way 

13. Circulate protocol draft with EPA 

14. Contact City about homeowner sample delivery 

15. Communicate to MDARD and City that business samples should be coordinated though lab 

16. Figure out number of samples from schools and child care facilities 

17. Confirm Lynda Dykema is POC for DHFIS 

1 8. Contact KWA to find out if there are any bottlenecks we need to remove 

19. Expedite 399 Plan and Phosphate Plan 

20. Get update on service line index card conversion and identify where partial replacements exist 

21 . Make sure DFIHS gets info so they can cross reference 

22. Legislative contacts 

23. Legislative time line and summary 

24. Dan reconnect with state superintendent 

25. Conduct After Action Plan 

26. Change Part 54-Drinking Water Revolving Loan Fund 


If you have any questions, please let me know. 
Dan Wyant 


i 



Director 


2 



From: 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: 

Friday, October 09, 2015 4:57 PM 

To: 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Dickinson, Sarah 
(GOV); Emmitt, Beth (GOV); Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

Cc: 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Subject: 

2015-10-09 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 
ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 

2015-10-09 Action Steps Week of October 12-16.pdf 

Importance: 

High 


Dear Governor, 

Attached is our update for today, October 9, 2015. 

We have included more information to the 26 Action Steps that we sent to you yesterday. 

If you have any questions, please let me know. Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 12-16 


Step No. 

Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Identify schools and prioritize for 
assessment 

GCISD, GCHD, DEQ, 
DHHS, and Flint 

Steve Busch 


2. 

Get DLARA plumbers organized 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 


3. 

Complete sampling instructions 

DEQ, DHHS, and EPA 

Pat Cook 


4. 

MDARD information for restaurants 

MDARD, DHHS, and DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 


5. 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 


6. 

Approve Flint plan for water line 


Mike Prysby 


7. 

Lead education plan for schools for 
drinking water 

DHHS and DEQ 

Liane Shekter Smith 


8. 

Begin regular meetings with Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 


9. 

Schedule Water Treatment Plant 
tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 


10. 

Meet with schools and DLARA - 
invitation only 

DEQ, DLARA, and Flint 
schools 

Karen Tommasulo 


11. 

Update DEQ Web page 

DEQ 

Karen Tommasulo 


12. 

Contact DHHS to see where they 
are with United Way regarding 
emergency declaration 

DEQ and DHHS 

George Krisztian 


13. 

Circulate protocol draft with EPA 

DEQ and EPA 

Liane Shekter Smith 


14. 

Contact city about homeowner 
sample delivery 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 


15. 

Communicate to MDARD and Flint 
that business samples should be 
coordinated though DEQ laboratory 

DEQ, MDARD, and Flint 

Liane Shekter Smith 
George Krisztian 

Liane to call MDARD 
and 

George to call Flint 


i 


October 9, 2015 

































Step No. 

Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

16. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Liane Shekter Smith 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 


17. 

Confirm Linda Dykema is Point of 
Contact for DHHS 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Done 

18. 

Contact KWA to find out if there are 
any bottlenecks we need to remove 

DEQ and KWA 

Mike Prysby 


19. 

Expedite 399 Plan and Phosphate 
Plan 

DEQ and Flint 

Mike Prysby 


20. 

Get update on service line index 
card conversion and identify where 
partial replacements exist 

DEQ and Flint 

Steve Busch 


21. 

Make sure DHHS gets information 
so they can cross reference 

DEQ and DHHS 

Steve Busch 


22. 

Legislative contacts 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 

Conference call with 
Sen. Jim Ananich 
scheduled for 
October 1 2 at 3 pm 

23. 

Legislative time line and summary 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 


24. 

Reconnect with State 
Superintendent Brian Whiston 

DEQ and Department of 
Education 

Dan Wyant 

Mary Beth Thelen to 
schedule 

25. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

To be scheduled for 
October 1 5 

26. 

Change Part 54 of NREPA - 
Drinking Water Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
Liane Shekter Smith 
Sonya Butler 



2 


October 9, 2015 








































From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, December 21, 2015 3:10 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Emmitt, Beth 

(GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Edgerton, Shelly (LARA); Dykema, Linda D. (DHHS); Wyant, 

Dan (DEQ) 

Subject: 2015-12-21 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY- 

CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: 2015-12-21 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update.pdf; EPA 12-16-15 E-Mail to 

Flint.pdf; MSU Extension Nutrition and Lead release_Decl8_FINAL.pdf 


Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

• Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

• EPA’s December 16, 2015, e-mail to the city of Flint 

• MSU Extension release regarding nutrition and lead 

As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


Key Actions : 

DEQ staff set aside additional time this week to address the backlog of FOIA legislative 
requests. 

A conference call with staff from the DEQ, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA), and city of Flint was held on December 15, 2015, to discuss the transition to the 
Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) as the city’s source of drinking water. The EPA 
indicated that they would provide written recommendations regarding the actions that 
Flint should take prior to switching to the KWA. 

On December 18, 2015, staff from the DEQ and DLARA conducted an initial plumbing 
evaluation of Flint Community Schools’ Northwestern High School and Southwestern 
Classical Academy. These two schools are scheduled for a final evaluation and 
subsequent sampling during the week of December 28, 2015. Due to the 
extracurricular activities that typically take place on the weekends, it was determined 
that the best time to conduct the sampling would be during the winter school break. 

Positions : 

There are no new positions to report since last week. 

Concern : 

On December 16, 2015, the EPA sent an e-mail to Flint City Administrator, Natasha 
Henderson, outlining the recommended precautionary measures for Flint to implement 
prior to switching to the KWA for their source water. The list of recommendations is 
very broad in nature and could potentially costs millions of dollars to implement. In 
addition, the recommendations could potentially delay the switch to the KWA by several 
months. Given the costs associated with implementing these measures, the city of Flint 
will be working to set up a meeting with Harvey Hollins and George Krisztian to discuss 
funding options, including asking the EPA for assistance. 

Significant Event : 

The DEQ has assigned Eric Pocan, Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance, 
to serve as the project manager to assist the city of Flint with providing the 
documentation necessary for the city to apply for loans under the Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund. A time line outlining the various steps in the process has been 
given to the city of Flint to assist them in ensuring that all requisite documents are 
generated and submitted within the necessary deadlines. Additional follow-up meetings 
will be held to assist the city with any issues related to the submission of the required 
documentation. 




FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


Changes from Previous Report : 

• Final plumbing assessment reports for Pierce Elementary and Doyle/Ryder 
Elementary Schools are being prepared. Staff from the DEQ, Office of 
Environmental Assistance, are being trained to assist with the preparation of the 
reports in order to reduce the turnaround time. 

• The MSU Extension provided a release regarding nutrition and lead. The release 
provides resources for utilizing nutrition to lessen the effects of lead exposure. 

• Staff from the DEQ met with staff from the city of Flint on December 1 8, 201 5, to 
discuss the recommendations made by the EPA earlier in the week. The city 
expressed concern that EPA’s recommendations went beyond the requirements 
of the Lead and Copper Rule. It was agreed that further discussion needed to 
occur to determine how these recommendations could be funded. 

• Staff from the DEQ met with the Michigan Association for Local Public Health 
(MALPH). One of the main topics of conversation was the Flint water situation. 
Members of MALPH expressed concern that the lead exposure issues were not 
unique to Flint and that, based on the recent article in Bridge Magazine, the issue 
was statewide and there were areas in the state that had significantly high lead 
exposure levels. 

Other Items : 

Attached is the EPA’s December 16, 2015, e-mail to the city of Flint, including the 

document entitled, “Task Force Recommendations Regarding Flint Drinking Water 

Treatment Performance Evaluation.” 

Attached is the MSU Extension release. 


Prepared by: 


George Krisztian, Flint Action 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental 
Telephone: 517-284- 6719 



Plan Coordinator 
Quality 


December 21 , 201 5 


Shaler, Karen (DEQ) 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Sygo, Jim (DEQ) 

Wednesday, December 16, 2015 7:49 PM 

Shekter Smith, Liane (DEQ); Busch, Stephen (DEQ); Prysby, Mike (DEQ); Krisztian, 

George (DEQ) 

Fwd: EPA Flint Drinking Water Task Force Recommendations -- Performance Evaluation 
Period 

performance evaluation period 12-16-15 final.pdf; ATT00001.htm 


FYI 

Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Kaplan, Robert" < kapian.rQbert@ep3.gov > 

Date: December 16, 2015 at 5:47:22 PM EST 

To: Natasha Plenderson < rJ~ienderson@citvoff1snt.com > 

Cc: "Sygo, Jim (DEQ)" < Sygo j @m ichiga n ,gov > 

Subject: EPA Flint Drinking Water Task Force Recommendations -- Performance Evaluation Period 

Natasha, 

Attached please find the EPA Flint Drinking Water Task Force Recommendations for a Performance 
Evaluation Period. 

As we discussed on December 11 and December 15, it is important to gain operational experience at the 
Flint Plant prior to distribution of KWA-sourced water. We have informally referred to this as a 
"shakedown" period for ensuring a safe and appropriate transition to the new water source. 

Please feel free to call me if you have any questions. We are pleased to continue to work together. 


Bob 

Cc: Jim Sygo, MDEQ 


1 




Flint Drinking Water Task Force (FTF 15-5) 


Task Force Recommendations Regarding Flint Drinking Water Treatment Performance 
Evaluation 

For protection of public health, Flint must avoid significant distribution system issues similar to 
those experienced following the source water switch to the Flint River and subsequent operation 
of Flint’s water treatment plant. 

The EPA Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force recommends that Flint develop and implement a 
Performance Assessment Plan prior to distribution of water from the Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) source. The plan must address how the treatment plant will be brought on- 
line, and how finished drinking water will be introduced to the distribution system. This plan is 
particularly important given the City has no experience treating the KWA-supplied water, and is 
operating a distribution system that is still recovering from the past upset. 

Flint should work with its consultant and MDEQ to establish objective water quality and plant 
performance criteria. The plan must include operation of Flint’s drinking water treatment plant 
for a reasonable period of time to treat KWA-supplied water until: 

(1) the treated water meets finished water quality goals; 

(2) the finished water quality is consistently maintained; 

(3) potential plant operational and mechanical start-up issues are identified and 
addressed; and 

(4) water plant operations staff are proficient in treating the new source. 

KWA water should not be distributed to the public until these conditions are satisfied. 

During this performance evaluation period, Flint must distribute to the public water from an 
alternate source. As water is already received from Detroit (Great Lakes Water Authority), that 
is an obvious and appropriate choice for that interim period. The length of the performance 
evaluation period will be dependent on the amount of time it takes for the treatment plant to 
consistently and reliably meet the performance criteria. 

Because of similarities in source water and in treatment processes with Detroit’s Fluron plant, the 
Flint water plant will likely be configured to produce treated water with similar quality to that of 
the water currently being received from Detroit. Continued use of Detroit water during the 
performance evaluation period will minimize the risk of distribution system upsets. 

We encourage Flint and the City’s consultant to perform a number of assessments prior to the 
completion of the KWA pipeline and availability of the Lake Ehrron source water to expedite the 
plant transition period. For example, the planned bench-scale jar tests will be helpful in 
establishing full-scale treatment plant operating parameters. Assessment of corrosion control 
treatment using Detroit source water with lead pipe loop rigs in advance of switching to the 
KWA source may also be transferrable to the KWA source water. Pipe loops rigs operated 
during the performance assessment period will help predict whether lead release will be an issue 
when the new plant goes on line. EPA will work with the City to set up pipe loops at the Flint 
treatment plant. 



CONTACT : Beth Stuever, stuever@anr.msu.edu or 269-274-1399 


MSU Extension and Hurley Children's Hospital release recipe and nutrition resource guide to help 
people lessen harmful effects of lead 

In the wake of growing concerns about exposure to and health impacts of lead in Flint, Michigan State 
University Extension and Hurley Children's Hospital have released a new nutrition booklet highlighting 
healthful, cost-effective meals that help lessen the harmful effects of lead. The booklet will be available 
beginning Saturday December 19, 12:30 p.m. at the Flint Farmers Market. 

Joanna Sheill, a registered dietitian with Hurley Wellness Services will be facilitating a cooking demo 
featuring one of the booklet's recipes - a hearty egg burrito. Free water filters will also be available at 
the cooking demonstration, courtesy of the Genesee County Health Department. 

"Healthy nutrition is one of the most important things we can do to protect our children from lead 
poisoning," said Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha, director of the Pediatric Residency Program at Hurley 
Children's Hospital and MSU College of Human Medicine. "In collaboration with MSU Extension nutrition 
experts, we have developed this lead-fighting recipe and nutrition resource guide." 

The booklets will be available during weekly cooking demonstrations at the Flint Farmers Market in early 
2016 and also be distributed by MSU Extension nutrition instructors at free nutrition and cooking 
workshops and community events throughout Genesee County. 

"We are delighted to provide this practical guide and recipe booklet to families to help prevent lead 
poisoning," said Dawn Contreras, MSU Extension's director of health and nutrition programs. "We want 
to protect our family members against the harmful effects of lead and an important way of doing that is 
through good nutrition." 

The booklet features 10 healthful recipes that focus on low-cost ingredients, many of which people will 
likely already have in their pantries and cupboards. Recipes include chocolate strawberry French toast, 
vegetable lasagna and roasted butternut squash. Contact information for several food assistance 
programs and other resources in Genesee County, including Women Infants and Children (WIC), 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and Double Up Food Bucks is also listed in the 
booklet. 

These programs help families throughout Michigan access healthy, nutritious and low-cost foods and are 
essential to helping Flint navigate through this challenging time, said Dr. Hanna-Attisha. 

The recipes in the booklet are provided via the Share Our Strength Cooking Matters curricula, which 
MSU Extension delivers throughout Michigan to help people learn how to eat healthy, cook and grocery 
shop on a limited budget. 

For more information about the nutrition booklet, please contact Dr. Mona Hanna-Attisha at 
mhannal@hurievmc.com or MSU Extension Educator Erin Powell at poweHe9@msu.edu or 810-244- 



8536. MSU Extension also offers free nutrition classes in the Flint area, for more details visit 
msue.anr.msu.edu or call 810-244-8500. 

### 



Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

Monday, September 28, 201 5 1 0:34 AM 
Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

RE: Updated Summary of September 15 Conference Call 
Summary - Conference Call with City of Flint.pdf 


Like das? 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


From: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, September 28, 2015 10:29 AM 

To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < D j.c ka n so n S n? 0 .-B 

Subject: Re: Updated Summary of September 15 Conference Call 

Correct. Don't worry about cover sheet 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Sep 28, 2015, at 10:27 AM, Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DickinsonS@-mlchig.an.goy > wrote: 

is this like what you showed me the other day with the briefing format or am i just PDFing the Word doc 
and combining into one doc. SRY I HAVE SO MANY QUESTIONS 


From: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, September 28, 2015 10:22 AM 

To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DickinsonS@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Fwd: Updated Summary of September 15 Conference Call 

Can you do? 

Sent from my iPhone 

Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" < $cx>tfcal2®roichigan.gov > 

Date: September 28, 2015 at 10:21:34 AM EDT 
To: "Bedan, Morgan (GOV)" < BedanM@miehigan.goy > 

Subject: FW: Updated Summary of September 15 Conference Call 

Can you put into a pdf and send to me please 


From: Cline, Richard (Treasury) 

Sent: Wednesday, September 16, 2015 3:13 PM 

To: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) < Sax ton J @ m i c hi ga n . g ov>; Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

< Wofkrna n W@mic hi g an,gov> 

Cc: Dempkowski, Angela (Treasury) < Dent pkowski A @ m i ch iga n .go v> 

Subject: Updated Summary of September 15 Conference Call 

Importance: High 

Tom/Wayne: 

l 



Attached, per your request, is an updated summary of the September 15 call with the 
City of Flint plus an update on utility upgrades, provided by the City. 

If you need anything further, let me know. 


Eric Cline j Department Manager 

State of Michigan j Michigan Department of Treasury j Office of Fiscal Responsibility 
480 W. Allegan Street, 3rd Flooi^Hjansing^M^4892£^^^^ 

| ‘In averse 

(331) 922-5228 

E-mail c3Mexi@nuchigan.gov 


CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: This e-mail, and any attachments, is for the sole use of the intended 
recipients) and snay contain information that is confidential and protected from disclosure under 
the law. Any unauthorized review, use, disclosure, or distribution is prohibited. If you are not the 
intended recipient, please contact the sender by reply e-maii, and delete/destroy all copies of the 
original message and attachments Thank you. 


2 



Summary: Conference Call with City of Flint 
September 15, 2015 


Participating: Tom Saxton, Wayne Workman, Fred Headen, Eric Cline, Mayor Walling, City 
Administrator Natasha Henderson, Finance Director Jody Lundquist, City Attorney Pete Bade, Assistant 
City Attorney Tony Chubb 


Redacted 


Summary: Conference Call with City of Flint 
September 15, 2015 


Redacted 


Treasury is not aware of any current Flint projects related to their water quality issues 
that could be funded through the DWRF program and DEQ is responsible for 
managing DWRF eligible projects. 


City of Flint 
Water Quality Update 

Wednesday September 16™' 2015 



GAC Installation 

What: $1,601,740 contract with LAN to design and install new filter media at the Water Plant 

Status: Complete 


Leak Detection 

What: $900,000 Treasury Distressed City Grant for Leak Detection / Pipe Wall Assessment 

Status: In Progress 

The vendor “echologics” is nearly 1/3 complete with the leak detection 

WPC Incinerator Shutdown 

What: $1,100,000 Treasury Distressed City Grant for WPC Incinerator Shutdown 

Status: In construction phase 

The walls are nearly done being erected. 

Next steps: Construction of the walls. 

Water Meter Installation 

What: $5,000,000 contract to purchase and install up to 18,000 water meters. 

Status: In progress 

The vendor has established a good routine and has installed approximately 3000 of the targeted 
9000 meters have been installed 

Installers are facing more resistance from customers about the change outs -300 people are 
refusing the installation. 

Small jumpers were added to the installation to protect plastic meters going in place of metal to 
protect electronics within the household. 

The main focus of this contract was the $2,500,000 on the front end to complete the targeted 
9000 meter installation. This was an FY15 expenditure. 

Next steps: Continue with the progress. 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

Tuesday, October 06, 2015 8:44 AM 
Kennedy, Jordan (GOV) 

FW: Flint Water updates 


Can you let me know if you hear that there will he stuff from cornms for Flint Water updates every day? Want to he sure 
I'm not sending the briefing without comms input if they have input to provide, Thaaaanks © 


From: Emmitt, Beth (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2015 8:39 AM 

To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DiekinsonS@michig3n.gov > 

Subject: FW: Flint Water updates 


From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2015 8:30 AM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV) <scottal2@michi g an. g ov> 

Cc: Emmitt, Beth (GOV) <emmittb @ mich iga n. go v>: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <A g enJ @ mich iga n. go v> 

Subject: Re: Flint Water updates 

Yes. 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:23 AM, Scott, Allison (GOV) < scotta 1 2@michi pan.gov > wrote: 

See below - DAN can your team assist with daily updates to GOV for his nightly briefing so he 
is not up to date. Your team would be responsible for collecting info from other depts involved 
etc 

Let me know if you have questions or concerns 

Thanks 

Thanks 

Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < AgenJ@mic3iigan.gov > 

Date: October 6, 2015 at 8:20:24 AM EDT 

To: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" <scottal 2 @m ichig a n. g o v> 

Cc: "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" < c lement e@ mi chi gan , go v >. "Muchmore, 
Dennis (GOV)" <muchmored@roldilgan. go v> 

Subject: Re: Flint Water updates 


l 



Update from Dan in briefing. Comms to also send update for briefing on stories or 
announcements upcoming. But Dan will have most accurate testing and analysis 
details to report. 


On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:14 AM, Scott, Allison (GOV) 

<scotta 1 2 @m iehig a n. g o v> wrote : 


What is most effective accurate rout? Dan provided update for 
briefing each day or does Comms shop speak to DEQ Comms and 
provide? 


Sent from my iPhone 


On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:05 AM, Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

wrote: 


We need a better update system re Flint Water. 


I saw in the press this am that DHFIS announced 
yesterday that water filters would start being given 
out today. This should have come internally with 
more detail. I had press questions last night. 


Overall, we should have a daily report on Flint until 
our recommendations are fully implemented. 


For example: 

1 . What are the water test results from the public 
schools? 

2. How many free test have been requested? How 
many have been done? How many remain and how 
long have they been waiting? What are the results - 
no lead, lead consistent with history, higher levels? 

3. How many filters have been distributed? How 
many unfulfilled requests? 

4. New blood test results? Especially in the two zip 
codes. 

5. Analysis of tech advisory group 

6. Analysis of the GLWA vs. Flint River vs. KWA. 


2 



Thanks 

Rick 

Sent from my iPad 


3 



From: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 21, 2015 2:51 PM 

To: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Subject: RE: 2015-10-21 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 

ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Attachments: Flint Water.pdf 

Here you go. Also, I just booked the rooms for 12/2 in DC so that should Lie set. 


From: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 21, 2015 2:33 PM 

To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DickmsonS@michigan.gGy > 

Subject: Fwd: 2015-10-21 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Can you put into one doc and send back? Thanks! 

Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" < Wy 3 ntD@michigan.g 0 v > 

Date: October 21, 2015 at 2:31:54 PM EDT 

To: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" < scottal2@michigan.gov >, "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 
< muchmored@michigan.gov >, "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < AgenJ@michigan.gov >, "Emmitt, Beth (GOV)" 
< emrnittb@michigan.gov >, "Bedan, Morgan (GOV)" < BedanM@niichigan.gov > 

Cc: "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" < WyantD@michigan.gov >, "Dickinson, Sarah (GOV)" 

< DickinsonS@rnichigan.gov > 

Subject: 2015-10-21 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT 
PRIVILEGED 

Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you 
have any questions, please let us know. 

1. Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 1 9-23, 201 5 

2 . Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


Thank you. 


Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 19-23 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated as part of the 
After Action Plan (Action 
Step #4) 

2. 

Schedule Flint Water Treatment 
Plant tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Scheduled for 10/23/15 at 
1 1 :30 a.m. 

3. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 

1,300 samples (13 schools 
and 100 samples per school) 

4. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting to be 
scheduled for week of 
10/19/15 

5. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of N RE PA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

6. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 


7. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


8. 

$1 million for DEQ Laboratory billing 
code 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


9. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 



FQ1A EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 21, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 




































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

10. 

Develop letter to schools 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated into Action 
Step #13 

11. 

Finalize sampling protocol 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Revised draft sampling 
protocol shared with DLARA, 
DHHS, EPA, and Genesee 
County Health Department on 
1 0/1 9/1 5 for comment 

12. 

Confirm school sampling logistics 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


13. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

A meeting with the 10 
remaining schools is 
tentatively scheduled for the 
week of 1 0/26/1 5 

14. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 

15. 

ODWMA staff observe a DLARA 
plumbing assessment 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Initial plumbing assessment is 
scheduled for 1 0/23/1 5; 
sampling to occur on 
10/24/15 

16. 

Develop sample form and chain of 
custody document 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ Laboratory has created 
a tillable PDF form for use in 
the school sampling protocol 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 21 , 201 5 






























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

17. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Conference call with EPA 
held on 10/20/15 to discuss 
comments 

18. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Construction permit is in 
process 

19. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


20. 

Provide city of Flint updated 
monitoring schedule based on 
Detroit Water and Sewerage 
Department (DWSD)/Great Lakes 
Water Authority (GLWA) service 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


21. 

Contact city of Flint and Genesee 
County Health Department daily for 
DWSD connection status updates 

DEQ, Flint, and 
Genesee County 
Health Department 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Switch to DWSD completed 
on 1 0/1 6/1 5; city of Flint will 
let DEQ know if they run into 
any unforeseen issues 

22. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


23. 

Verify city of Flint distribution 
operations under DWSD/GLWA 
service 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 3 October 21 , 201 5 




























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

24. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


25. 

Provide DFIHS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


26. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHHS related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

4 October 21, 2015 















Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• Action Step #1 has been incorporated into the After Action Plan (Action Step #4). 

• It was determined that the information in Action Step #1 0 would be 
communicated better in person and has, therefore, been incorporated into Action 
Step #13. 

• DEQ staff has tentatively identify the week of October 26 to meet with 
representatives from the remaining 10 locations in the Flint Community Schools 
who were not present at the October 16 meeting at the Superintendent’s office. 

• DEQ staff has contacted DHHS to request a meeting regarding lead education 
materials for schools. 

• The first plumbing assessment has been scheduled for Friday, October 23. The 
subsequent sampling of the first facility has been scheduled for Saturday, 

October 24. This decision was made jointly among DEQ, DLARA, and DHHS in 
an effort to ensure that sampling staff could properly evaluate the sampling 
protocol without the added pressure of completing the sampling process before 
students arrived on-site. 

• The DEQ Laboratory has created a tillable PDF form for use in the school 
sampling protocol. This form was created to streamline the information gathering 
process. The form was submitted for review by staff in DEQ, DHFIS, and 
DLARA, and comments were subsequently incorporated. The form is now 
complete and ready for use. 

• The corrosion control treatment plan (CCTP) and permit application were 
received late last Friday, October 1 6, and were reviewed. Our review comments 
were provided to Flint’s consultant [Lockwood, Andrews & Newnam, Inc. (LAN)]. 
The CCTP was forwarded to EPA on October 16, and their comments were 
received on October 19. A conference call was held on October 20 between our 
staff and Darren Lytle and Michael Schock of EPA to discuss the main comments 
(EPA’s and DEQ’s) to confirm that both agencies concur with the design and 
proposed corrosion control dosages. We are currently preparing a revised set of 
comments, based on our discussion with EPA. The revised comments will be 
sent to EPA to confirm concurrence before sending to LAN. 

• An Act 399 permit will be issued to the city of Flint to install corrosion control 
treatment following receipt of revised plans, specs, and - as needed - a permit 
application that addresses the revised review comments. 

• DEQ staff has contacted DHHS to schedule a meeting to discuss the 
development of childcare facility guidance. This guidance will be similar in nature 
to what is being done in schools but will be tailored to address the specific 




FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


concerns with younger children and the smaller plumbing infrastructure of typical 
childcare facilities. 

Additional Actions: 

• Standing meetings with the city of Flint have been scheduled for Fridays at 
10:00 a.m. These meetings have been scheduled through December 18. In 
addition, a tour of the Flint Water Treatment Plant has been scheduled for 
October 23. The DEQ be taking video footage of the tour, showing the 
coordinated efforts being taken by the city of Flint, DEQ, DHHS, and DLARA. 
Genesee County Health Department (GCFID) has been invited to the Friday 
meetings as well as the tour, and GCFID is in the process of determining if they 
can participate. 

• A meeting was held between staff from the DEQ, DLARA, and DHHS to discuss 
details regarding the flow and coordination of efforts for the school sampling 
protocol. It was mutually agreed that it was best to only do one school at first so 
that we can ensure that the process runs smoothly from partner to partner. The 
first plumbing evaluation will be done at Freeman Elementary School on Friday, 
October 23. Steve Busch of the DEQ will accompany staff from DLARA to 
answer questions they might have during their plumbing evaluations. The 
subsequent water sampling effort will take place the next day, on Saturday, 
October 24. It was agreed that taking the samples on Saturday would allow staff 
to be able to evaluate the sampling process without the added pressure of 
ensuring that the sampling was complete before students arrived at the building. 

• DEQ Director Dan Wyant, Jim Sygo, George Krisztian, and Karen Tommasulo 
held a conference call with Dr. Susan Hedman, EPA’s Regional Administrator, 
and other representatives from EPA to discuss the EPA’s formation of the Flint 
Safe Drinking Water Task Force. The purpose of the Task Force is to provide 
one-stop shopping for technical assistance for the optimization of corrosion 
controls for the switch from Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to the 
Karegnondi Water Authority. EPA requested a point of contact for the DEQ, and 
Director Wyant suggested Chief Deputy Director Jim Sygo. EPA agreed that this 
was an appropriate choice and requested a formal letter indicating Chief Deputy 
Director Sygo as the point of contact. 

• DHHS has indicated that the total water filter/pitcher distribution for the period of 
October 6 through October 20 was 9,373 units. 

Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


October 21 , 2015 




From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) 

Thursday, October 22, 2015 1:33 PM 
Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

RE: 2015-10-22 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 
ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Flint Water.pdf 


Anything 4u 


From: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 1:25 PM 

To: Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DickinsonS@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Fwd: 2015-10-22 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 


Can you frow deez into one and send to me 
Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" < WyantD@rnichigan.gov > 

Date: October 22, 2015 at 12:39:13 PM EDT 

To: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" < scottal2@michigan.gov >, "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 
< muchmored@michigan.gov >, "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < AgenJ@michigan.gov >, "Emmitt, Beth (GOV)" 
< emmittb@michigan.gov >. "Bedan, Morgan (GOV)" < BedanM@michigan.gov > 

Cc: "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" < WvantD@miehigan.gov >. "Dickinson, Sarah (GOV)" 

< DickinsonS@michigan.gov > 

Subject: 2015-10-22 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT 
PRIVILEGED 

Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you 
have any questions, please let us know. 

1. Action Steps Updated Document for the week of October 1 9-23, 201 5 

2 . Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



City of Flint Water 

Action Steps for Week of October 19-23 



Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

1 . 

Update 2004 letter to EPA 

DEQ 

Dana DeBruyn 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated as part of the 
After Action Plan (Action 
Step #4) 

2. 

Schedule Flint Water Treatment 
Plant tour 

DEQ and Flint 

George Krisztian 

Scheduled for 10/23/15 at 
1 1 :30 a.m. 

3. 

Figure out number of samples from 
schools and child care facilities 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Pat Cook 
Steve Busch 

1,300 samples (13 schools 
and 100 samples per school) 

4. 

Conduct After Action Plan 

DEQ 

George Krisztian 

Initial meeting scheduled for 
10/22/15 

5. 

Introduce legislative changes to 
Part 54 of N RE PA - Drinking Water 
Revolving Loan Fund 

DEQ, Treasury, 
and EPA 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 
Sonya Butler 

Draft language submitted to 
Maggie Pallone for review 

6. 

After Action Review Panel 

DEQ 

Madhu Anderson 
George Krisztian 
Karen Tommasulo 

Panel created and press 
release issued on 10/21/15 

7. 

Staff hiring plan 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 


8. 

$1 million for DEQ Laboratory billing 
code 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 

Billing codes created on 
10/21/15 

9. 

Finalize fiscal year 2017 budget 
request 

DEQ 

Maggie Pallone 
George Krisztian 



FQIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

October 22, 2015 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


1 




































Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

10. 

Develop letter to schools 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

This Action Step has been 
incorporated into Action 
Step #13 

11. 

Finalize sampling protocol 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Comments received from 
EPA’s Flint Safe Drinking 
Water Task Force (Task 
Force); DEQ staff continuing 
to finalize protocol 

12. 

Confirm school sampling logistics 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Logistics have been finalized 
for the initial sampling 
scheduled for 1 0/24/1 5 

13. 

Meeting(s) with school 
staff/management 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

A meeting with the 10 
remaining schools is 
tentatively scheduled for the 
week of 1 0/26/1 5 

14. 

Meet with DHHS and discuss all 
lead education material for schools 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 

15. 

ODWMA staff observe a DLARA 
plumbing assessment 

DEQ and DLARA 

Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Initial plumbing assessment is 
scheduled for 1 0/23/1 5; 
sampling to occur on 
10/24/15 

16. 

Develop sample form and chain of 
custody document 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ Laboratory has created 
a tillable PDF form for use in 
the school sampling protocol 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 2 October 22, 201 5 





























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

17. 

Review corrosion control treatment 
plan and get any EPA comments 

DEQ and EPA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Conference call with EPA 
held on 10/20/15 to discuss 
comments 

18. 

Review construction permit 
application and issue construction 
permit for phosphate equipment 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Construction permit is in 
process 

19. 

Review Standby Operation of Flint 
Water Treatment Plant with city of 
Flint 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ staff is reviewing and 
seeking clarification on 
comments received from 
EPA’s Task Force 

20. 

Provide city of Flint updated 
monitoring schedule based on 
Detroit Water and Sewerage 
Department (DWSD)/Great Lakes 
Water Authority (GLWA) service 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


21. 

Contact city of Flint and Genesee 
County Health Department daily for 
DWSD connection status updates 

DEQ, Flint, and 
Genesee County 
Health Department 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Switch to DWSD completed 
on 1 0/1 6/1 5; city of Flint will 
let DEQ know if they run into 
any unforeseen issues 

22. 

Work with Karegnondi Water 
Authority (KWA) and other agencies 
to address bottleneck issues 

DEQ and KWA 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

Monitoring letter expected to 
be mailed on 10/22/15 

23. 

Verify city of Flint distribution 
operations under DWSD/GLWA 
service 

DEQ 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

City of Flint Water Action Steps 3 October 22, 201 5 




























Action Step 

Involved Parties 

DEQ Point(s) 
of Contact 

Status 

24. 

Contact city of Flint for Service Line 
Record status update and obtain a 
copy of the records to date 

DEQ and Flint 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


25. 

Provide DFIHS with any available 
cross-reference information 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 


26. 

Develop childcare facility guidance 
or review DHHS related materials 

DEQ and DHHS 

Jim Sygo 
Steve Busch 
Pat Cook 
Mike Prysby 

DEQ has contacted DHHS to 
schedule a meeting 


City of Flint Water Action Steps 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

4 October 22, 2015 















Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


• The initial meeting for the internal After Action Plan is scheduled for October 22. 
The purpose of the meeting is to define the scope of the internal review, create a 
detailed time line, connect all communications together to determine where 
communications could have been improved, and create a list of lessons learned 
and action steps moving forward. 

• Madhu Anderson has provided information for the creation of an external After 
Action Review Panel. The Panel members have been selected, and a press 
release was issued by the Governor’s office on October 21 . 

• The DEQ Laboratory, working in conjunction with MDOT’s Accounting Services 
Division, has created the necessary billing codes to allow payment for the lead 
and copper samples from the city of Flint to be processed. 

• The EPA’s Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force (Task Force) has provided 
comments to staff in the Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance 
(ODWMA) on the sampling protocol. These comments are being reviewed, and 
ODWMA staff is continuing to finalize the protocol. 

• The logistics for the initial plumbing evaluation and subsequent water sampling 
have been finalized among staff from DEQ, DLARA, and DHHS. The plumbing 
inspection is scheduled for Friday, October 23, and the water samples will be 
taken on Saturday, October 24. 

• DEQ staff is responding to comments on the corrosion control proposal made by 
the EPA’s Task Force. DEQ staff is following up on questions raised during the 
October 20 conference call. 

• A monitoring schedule letter is expected to be mailed on October 22. The 
monitoring schedule addresses the change back to a customer supply of the 
Great Lakes Water Authority. A final copy of the letter will be attached to 
tomorrow’s update. 

Additional Actions: 

• At the request of Representative Sheldon Neeley, George Krisztian contacted 
Carlita Earl, Principal of the Eagle’s Nest Academy. Ms. Earl has formally 
requested that Eagle’s Nest Academy receive a plumbing evaluation and water 
sampling as outlined in the newly-developed school assessment protocol. 

Ms. Earl was informed that she would be added to the list of schools being 
evaluated and that the original 13 Flint Community Schools buildings would be 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


evaluated first and then the DEQ/DLARA/DHHS would expand the evaluation 
process to charter schools, parochial schools, and other childcare facilities. 

Ms. Earl was informed that since the Eagle’s Nest Academy serves children in 
grades K-4 that they would be placed at the top of the list once the evaluations of 
the original 13 buildings are complete. 

• Director Dan Wyant, Chief Deputy Director Jim Sygo, and George Krisztian met 
with a group of pastors and citizens who came to Constitution Hall to voice their 
concerns regarding the water in Flint. The discussion lasted for approximately 
one hour, and the topics included a history of events, questions regarding how 
decisions were made, and the plan moving forward. The group indicated that 
they had read a great deal in the media and were interested in finding out what 
DEQ’s perspective of the situation was. The questions were tough, but the 
conversation was very respectful. The group was informed that an independent 
group external to the DEQ would be conducting an After Action Review, and this 
information seemed to be well-received. 

• Shelly Edgerton of DLARA spoke to Eric Swanson of DTMB, who is going to call 
Howard Croft, Public Works Director, city of Flint, about the GIS program that the 
city of Flint is trying to run. Eric will follow up with Shelly after the conversation. 

In addition, DLARA will be meeting again with the city of Flint. 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 
Telephone: 517-284-6719 


October 22, 2015 



From: Prysby, Mike (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, January 05, 2015 8:31 AM 

To: Brader, Valerie (GOV) 

Subject: Accepted: Conference call re emergency service requirements (Genesee County - 

DWSD) 


l 



From: Shekter Smith, Liane (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, January 05, 2015 8:57 AM 

To: Brader, Valerie (GOV) 

Subject: Accepted: Conference call re emergency service requirements (Genesee County - 

DWSD) 


l 



Subject: 

Location: 

Start: 

End: 

Recurrence: 

Meeting Status: 

Organizer: 

Required Attendees: 


Optional Attendees: 



MDHHS Action Plan 
Flint EBL.DO... 


DM/EC/JA/RB/JW/JR/HH/SW/DM/DW/NL/GL/DP or DA or ML re Flint next steps 
Governor's Conference Room - 2nd Floor Romney (call in number below) 

Wed 10/14/2015 11:30 AM 
Wed 10/14/2015 12:00 PM 

(none) 

Meeting organizer 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Baird, Richard 
(GOV); Walsh, John (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Wurfel, Sara 
(GO V); Murray, David (GOV); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Lyon, Nick (DHHS); Lasher, Geralyn 
(DHHS); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Ackerman, Darin (GOV); Lange, Michelle (GOV); 
Rospond, Laurie (GOV); Thomet, Ruth (GOV); Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ); Grijalva, Nancy 
(DHHS); Hall, Jean (GOV); VanSickle, Michele (GOV); Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Wells, Eden (DHHS); Adler, Ari (GOV) 


Michigan Department of Community Health (MDHHS) Flint Water Action Plan 



Action 

Local Lead 

MDHHS 

Lead 

Tasks 

Filter/Water 

Distribution 

Tamara Brickley 
(Genesee County 
Health 

Department-GCFID) 

Sheryl 

Thompson, 

MDHHS 

Coordination of distribution (GCHD) 
Identify at-risk sub-groups (GCHD) 
Tracking filters- uniform registry held by 
GCHD 

Ordering filter replacements (MDHHS) 


Blood Testing 

Tony LaRocco 
(GCHD) 

Possible partners: 
Fiurley 
Great Flint 
Health 
Coalition 

- MIHP 

- LHD 
Schools 

Dr. Eden 

Wells/ 

Nancy 

Peeler 

(CLPPP) 

Test all 

o Students 0-16 
o Priorities: 

■ 3 schools 

■ 2 zip codes 

■ ages 0-15 

Convene meeting with GCHD and all 
potential partners (MDHHS) 
o Partner with schools- 

information about testing sites 
options distributed through 
school districts to parents 
o Partner with Great Flint Health 
Coalition-network to develop 
testing sites and information 
about testing to healthcare 
providers 
o Partner with 

Hurley/McClaren/Genesys 
o Partner with MIHP/Home 
Visiting Program 

Confirm that the state lab has capacity 
to handle increase in tests- CONFRIMED 

Case 

Management 
Follow Up 

Tony LaRocco 
(GCHD) 

Eden 

Wells/ 

Nancy 

Peeler 

(CLPPP) 

Identification of all current positives- 
confirmatory testing for > 5 mcg/dl (as 
of April 2014) 

Maintain registry of all tests performed 
(-/+) 

Follow-up all cases >5 mcg/dl with the 
CLPP Case Management protocol 


Elevated Blood 
Level 

Investigations! 
all > 5 mcg/dl) 

Dawn Hailwood 
(GCHD) 

Linda 

Dykema 

Secure financial resources necessary to 
support environmental health response 
Follow-up CLPPP to see if immediate 
funds available 

Recommendation to contract with Lead 
Investigation company thru SEMHA- 







licensed investigators 


Communications 

Hilda McShane 
(GCHD) 

Geralyn 

Lasher 

Daily MDHHS and GCHD phone calls 
(3PM) 

Provide provider education- links sent 
for Governor's site to GCHD 10/12 
Provide public education 
Provide risk education 
Provide links with lead prevention 
information to Flint 





Subject: 

Location: 


RDS/DM/JA/EC/DW/NL/HH/MAnderson - Flint After Action Meeting 
Governor's Office, Romney 


Start: Wed 10/21/2015 9:00 AM 

End: Wed 10/21/2015 10:00 AM 

Recurrence: (none) 

Meeting Status: Accepted 

Organizer: GovCalendar 

Required Attendees: VanSickle, Michele (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Clement, 

Elizabeth (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); 
Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ); Lyon, Nick (DHHS); Grijalva, Nancy (DHHS); Clayton, Stacie 
(GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Anderson, Madhu (DEQ) 


Ken Sikkema, Chris Kolb, Eric Rothstein, Dr. Matt Davis, Dr. Lawrence Reynolds (by phone) 


Host: RH to host 

Agenda: 

1) Introductions 

2) Mission of Task Force 

3) Background Info 

4) Discussion of Timeline 

5) Q& A from Task Force Members 

6) Communications Strategy/Review Press Release 


Attachments: 

1. JA Memo 

2. Resumes 

3. Press Release 



Flint After Action Flint After Action Flint After Action 
Meeting. pdf,., Kolb, Davis,.. Press Relea... 



1 





RICK SHYOm 
AWSSWCJpl 


State os' Michigan 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE 

KANfttNCf 


Bft!AN CmtBY 
OOVfiENOil 


Contacts: 

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 

Sara Wurfel or Dave Murray 

Wednesday, Oct. 21 , 2015 

517-335-6397 



Gov. Rick Snyder announces formation of Flint Water 
After Action Report Commission 

Experts will provide ongoing monitoring of city water system 

LANSING, Mich. - Gov. Rick Snyder today announced a new task force to review the 
state’s actions regarding water usage and testing in Flint. The commission will conduct 
a thorough review and lay out recommendations on future guidelines for water testing. It 
will also monitor the transition of Flint’s city water system back to the Great Lakes Water 
Authority, and its eventual transition to the Karegnondi Water Authority pipeline. 

The commission will be co-chaired by Ken Sikkema of Public Sector Consultants and 
Chris Kolb, of the Michigan Environmental Council. Also serving will be Dr. Matthew 
Davis of the University of Michigan Health System, and Eric Rothstein, of the Galardi 
Rothstein Group. 

“As stated previously, transitioning back to the Great Lakes Water Authority is a good 
first step to protecting public health in Flint, but it’s not the last step,” Snyder said. 
“Bringing in outside experts to evaluate our actions and help monitor and advise on 
technical issues will be key to continuing work on the comprehensive action plan and 
ensuring safe drinking water for all the citizens of Flint.” 

Ken Sikkema is a senior policy fellow at Public Sector Consultants, where he 
specializes in public finance, environment, and energy policy. Prior to joining the firm, 
Sikkema served in both the Michigan House and Senate, culminating with four years as 
Senate Majority Leader. He has also served as both an adjunct and visiting professor at 
Grand Valley State University. 

Chris Kolb is president of the Michigan Environmental Council, a statewide coalition of 
70 environmental, public health and faith-based nonprofit groups. Before joining the 
MEC, Kolb represented Ann Arbor in the state House for six years and served eight 
years on the Ann Arbor City Council. He has been president of the MEC for eight years. 

Matthew Davis, M.D., M.A.P.P., is Professor of Pediatrics and Internal Medicine at the 
University of Michigan Health System and Professor of Public Policy at the Gerald R. 
Ford School at the University of Michigan, having joined the faculty in 2000. He is the 
founding Director of the C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children's Health 
and the National Voices Project. Dr. Davis also previously served as the Chief Medical 
Executive of the Michigan Department of Community Health/Department of Health and 
Human Services. 







Eric Rothstein is a national water issues consultant and principal at the Galardi 
Rothstein Group. He served as an independent advisor on the creation of the Great 
Lakes Water Authority. Rothstein also has served as Jefferson County, Alabama’s rate 
consultant and municipal advisor for litigation related to the county’s bankruptcy and 
issuance of $1 .7 billion in sewer warrants and led strategic financial planning for the City 
of Atlanta’s Department of Watershed Management. He has more than 30 years of 
experience in water, wastewater and stormwater utility finance and rate-making 
assessments. 

As Gov. Snyder previously stated, reconnecting with the authority will not completely 
resolve the city’s problem with lead service lines or aging infrastructure. It will take time 
for pipes in Flint to become coated with the phosphate corrosion control. 

To best protect public health, state and local authorities will continue to carry out steps 
outlined on Oct. 2 in a comprehensive action plan, including continued testing, the use 
of faucet filters and providing residents with accurate information about steps to 
eliminate lead exposure. The Michigan Departments of Environmental Quality is 
continuing to provide free water filters, free lead testing through the state laboratory for 
Flint water customers, and hiring additional staff to conduct health exposure monitoring 
for lead in drinking water. 


#### 



Chris Kolb 


EDUCATION : The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 

Bachelor of Science in Natural Resources, GPA 3,55 
Dean’s List, Honors Society 

Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 

Graduate studies in Political Science focusing on Quantitative Analysis, and Interest Group 
Politics; Scholarship, Grant, and Fellowship Recipient. Accepted into advanced studies for 
PhD. 

EXPERIENCE: Executive Director, Current 

Unity Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 

Responsible for the organization and implementation of the new statewide campaign, to 
create a progressive Michigan by advancing lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) 
and social justice values and issues. Coordinate and implement the collaborative efforts of 
five leading LGBT and equality organizations; ACLU of Michigan, Affirmations, Michigan 
Equality, SPICE, and Triangle Foundation. Lead the campaign’s research and subsequent 
activities in Michigan. Successfully developed and implemented a primary election strategy 
in legislative races. Engage in successful communications with the LGBT community, the 
campaign’s supporters and partners, and supportive national groups. Coordinate a broad, 
effective campaign, with consultants, including coalition building, list building, voter contact 
and get-out-the-vote activities. Represent the organization at meetings and events with the 
public and press. 

Vice President for Public Affairs, 2007-2008 

Early Childhood Investment Corporation, Lansing Michigan 

Directed all public affairs activities in a statewide effort to improve the status of 
Michigan’s children, aged zero to five. Developed and implemented public policy at the 
federal, state and local levels working with key decision-makers, staff and public. Educated 
and informed elected officials on the importance of investing in early childhood. Secured 
increased funding over $11 million, including $5.75 million for ECIC. Helped to develop 
Governor’s $30 million early childhood initiative outlined in Fiscal 2009 budget. 
Successfully planned 2008 Star Power Rally at the Capitol for over 500 early childhood 
supporters. Coordinated activities of the Michigan Legislative Children’s Caucus; worked 
directly with state departments involved in early childhood development including 
Community Health, Education, Human Services, and Labor and Economic Growth; provided 
speakers and testimony to legislative hearings to inform and educate Legislature; reviewed 
and monitored all legislation impacting early childhood development; provided training to 
local Great Start Collaborative® to work with their local, state, and federal decision-makers; 
coordinated development of an early childhood public policy agenda; and, worked to 
increase knowledge of Legislature and public on importance of early childhood 
development, advance public education, and increase public and private investment in 
Michigan’s children. 

State Representative, 2001-2006 

53 rd State House District, Lansing, Michigan 

Three-term State Representative, appointed for two terms (2003-2006) to the House 
Appropriations Committee served as the Ranking Democrat on four appropriations 



subcommittees: Economic Development, Department of Environmental Quality, Higher 
Education, and the Department of Human Services, and. served on the Corrections 
subcommittee (2003-4). In second term, was appointed by Governor Granholm to serve on 
the Michigan Land Use Leadership Council to develop a report and recommendations for the 
Governor and Legislature on land use issues. Appointed Ranking Democrat on. the House 
Committee on Land Use and Environment (2001-2002), and served on the House Commerce 
Committee (2001-2002). Authored numerous legislation enacted into law, including 
legislation creating joint planning commissions, Land Bank Fast Track authorities, open 
space ordinance requirement for local governments, lead poisoning prevention for children, 
regulation of polybrominated biphenyl ethers (PBDEs), renewal of the baseline 
environmental assessment fee, establishment of the refined, petroleum product cleanup 
program, to help clean up leaking underground storage tanks, welfare reform and a. bill to 
help create the Fire Services Bureau. Legislative focus included, land use and planning, the 
environment, natural resources, toxins, children’s health, alternative energy, economic 
development, mental health, higher education, and civil rights, 

Legislative Assistant, 1999-2000 
52 nsJ District, Lansing Michigan 

Served as a Legislative Assistant to Representative John Hansen, provided, policy research, 
constituent services, reviewed legislation and executive budget data, and attended meetings 
on behalf of the Representative in the District. Contacted constituents and interest groups, 
assisted with amendments and bill development. 

Environmental Consultant 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 1993-1999 

Provided consulting services in the environmental management and compliance field to 
businesses in Michigan and Ohio. Consulting services specialized in solid waste 
management, waste reduction, and recycling, environmental compliance and permitting, 
worker safety training, and project management including on-site facility management. 

Legislator of the Year, Michigan Fire Chiefs, 2006 
Presidents Award, Michigan Fire Inspectors Society, 2006 
Co-Chair of the Fire Sendee Legislative Caucus 
The 2005 Legislative Award from the Michigan Audubon Society' 

Liberty Bell Award, Washtenaw County Bar Association, 2004 

Legislative Award from the National Alliance on Mental Illness, 2004 

Environmental Stewardship Award, Sierra Club, Mackinac Chapter, 2004 

Legislator of the Year, U of M Students of Choice and College Democrats, 2003 

Freedom Award, St. Mary’s Christian Fellowship, 2002 

Legislative Award from the Michigan League of Conservation Voters, 2002 

Henry Toll Fellowship Leadership Class of 2002, Council of State Governments (CSG) 

Legislator of the Year, Association for Children's Mental Health. 2001 

Bowhay Institute for Legislative Leadership, CSG - Midwest, 2001 

Next Generation Leadership Class at East-West Center, University of Hawaii, 1996 

Ann Arbor City Councilmember, 1993-2000, Mayor Pro-tem, 1994-2000# 

HD 7 / AIDS Resource Center Board of Directors, Chair; Girl Scout Council of Huron 
Valley, Board of Directors; previously served as Co-Chair of the Affordable Housing Task 
Force, Washtenaw County Solid Waste Planning Commission, and Michigan Municipal 
League’s Transportation and Environmental Committee; volunteered for organizations 
involving environment, youth, hunger, LGBT, housing, health care, veterans and religious 
organizations. 



Matthew M. Davis, M.D., M.A.P.P. 

Professor of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases 
Professor of Internal Medicine 
Professor of Public Policy 
Professor of Health Management and Policy 
University of Michigan 



EDUCATION 

HIGH SCHOOL Eden Senior High School (19S 1-1985) 

Eden, New York 

UNDERGRADUATE Swarthmore College (1985-1989) BA with honors, 1989 

Swarthmore, Pennsylvania 
Major Field: Biology 

PROFESSIONAL Harvard Medical School (1990-1994) MD cum laude, 1994 

Boston, Massachusetts 

Irving B. Harris School of 

Public Policy Studies (1999-2000) MAPP, 2000 
University of Chicago 
Chicago, Illinois 


POSTDOCTORAL TRAINING 


Internship in Internal Medicine and Pediatrics June 1994 - June 1995 

Brigham & Women’s Hospital and The Children’s Hospital 
Boston, Massachusetts 

Residency in Internal Medicine and Pediatrics June 1995 - June 1998 

Harvard Combined Residency in Medicine and Pediatrics 
Boston, Massachusetts 

Acting Chief Residency in Primary Care/Intemal Medicine July 1997 - November 1997 

Brigham and Women’s Hospital 
Boston, Massachusetts 

Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Clinical Scholars Program July 1998 - June 2000 

University of Chicago 
Chicago, Illinois 


Davis CV 


1 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 


CERTIFICATION AND LICENSURE 


State of Massachusetts full medical license #155272 
State of Illinois full medical license #0036-098102 
State of Michigan full medical license #J693073 
Drug Enforcement Administration Certificate #BD5935575 
Diplomate of the American Board of Pediatrics, #064080 

- Recertified through 12/31/2017 

Diplomate of the American Board of Internal Medicine, #194261 

- Recertified through 12/31/2021 


ACADEMIC APPOINTMENTS 


Lecturer in Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases and 
Internal Medicine 
University of Michigan 

Core Faculty, Child Health Evaluation and Research (CHEAR) Unit 
Division of General Pediatrics, 

University of Michigan 

Core Faculty, Pediatric Health Services Research Fellowship Program, 
Division of General Pediatrics 
University of Michigan 

Affiliated Faculty, Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program 
University of Michigan 

Assistant Professor in Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases and 
Internal Medicine 
University of Michigan 

Affiliated Faculty, National Poverty Center, Gerald R. Ford 
School of Public Policy 
University of Michigan 

Assistant Professor of Public Policy, Gerald R. Ford School of 
Public Policy 
University of Michigan 

Core Faculty, Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program 
University of Michigan 

Associate Professor of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, 

Internal Medicine, and Public Policy 
University of Michigan 

Professor of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, 

Internal Medicine, and Public Policy 
University of Michigan 

Professor of Health Management and Policy 

School of Public Health, University of Michigan 


1997- 1998 
1998 -2001 
2000 - 
2000 - 

1998 - 

1999 - 

July 2000 - February 2002 

July 2000 - 

July 2000 - 

July 2000 - June 2004 
February 2002 - August 2006 

July 2003 - 

January 2004 - September 2006 
July 2004 - 

September 2006 - August 2013 
September 2013 - 
January 2014 - 


Davis CV 


2 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



ACADEMIC ADMINISTRATIVE APPOINTMENTS 


Co-Director, Pediatric Health Services Research Fellowship Program, 
Division of General Pediatrics, University of Michigan 

Co-Director, Resident Elective in Pediatric Health Services Research 
for Under-represented Minorities, Division of 
General Pediatrics, University of Michigan 

Director, Resident Elective in Pediatric Health Services Research 
for Under-represented Minorities, Division of 
General Pediatrics, University of Michigan 

Director, Fellowship Program in Pediatric Health Services Research, 
Division of General Pediatrics, University of Michigan 

Associate Director, Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program, 
University of Michigan 

Co-Director, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Clinical Scholars 
Program, University of Michigan 

Co-Director, Child Health Initiative Working Group, Michigan 
Institute for Clinical & Health Research (CTSA), 

University of Michigan 

Director, Child Health Initiatives Working Group, Michigan 
Institute for Clinical & Health Research (CTSA), 

University of Michigan 

Associate Director, Michigan Institute for Clinical & Health Research 
(CTSA), University of Michigan 

Faculty Director, Path of Excellence in Health Policy — Programs, 
Systems, and Economics, University of Michigan Medical 
School 

Director, Communities Engagement Core and Participant Recruitment 
Core, Michigan Institute for Clinical & Health 
Research (MICHR) 

Deputy Director, Institute for Healthcare Policy and Innovation, 
University of Michigan 


CLINICAL/HOSPITAL APPOINTMENTS 


Clinical Instructor in Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, 

Harvard Medical School 

Clinical Instructor in Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, 

University of Chicago, Pritzker School of Medicine 
Staff Physician in Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases and 

Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Health System 


PUBLIC HEALTH / HEALTH POLICY APPOINTMENTS 


Chief Medical Executive, Department of Community Health and 

Department of Health and Human Services, State of Michigan 


July 2003 - June 2006 
July 2003 - June 2005 

July 2005 - 

July 2006 - 

July 2007 - June 2008 

July 2008 - 

May 2011 - Sep 2011 

Sep 2011 - March 2013 

Jan 2012 -March 2013 
November 2014 - 

Jan 2015 - 

May 2015 - 

June 1994 - June 1998 
July 1998 - June 2000 
July 2000 - 

March 2013 - April 2015 


Davis CV 


3 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



GRANT SUPPORT 


Current 

Principal Investigator: National Voices Project 
W.K. Kellogg Foundation 
Total cost: $2,135,229. July 2011 - June 2016. 

Principal Investigator: C.S. Mott Children ’s Hospital National Poll on Children ’s Health 
University of Michigan Flealth System 
Total cost: $1,868,800. July 2010 - June 2016. 

Principal Investigator: Health Homes Project - Planning and Evaluation 
Michigan Department of Flealth and Human Services 
Total cost: $272,000. May 2015 - September 2016. 

Co-Investigator (PI: G Mashour): Michigan Institute for Clinical and Health Research 
NIH / National Center for Advancing Translational Science 
Total cost: $48,788,667. June 2012 - May 2017. 


Recent 

Principal Investigator: Pediatric Health Services Research Training (T32) 

Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute for Child Health and Human Development 
Total cost: $1,271,100. May 2010 - June 2015. 

Principal Investigator: Coursera Initiative: Understanding and Improving the US Healthcare System. 
University of Michigan Medical School. 

Total cost: $10,000. January 2013 - December 2013. 

Principal Investigator: The Michigan Child Health Research Priorities (M-CHRP) Project 
Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases 
Total cost: $20,000. February 2012 - February 2013. 

Principal Investigator: Economics of Vaccines - Tracking Vaccines under Development to Determine 
Cost Drivers of the Vaccine Development and Approval Process 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
Total cost: $498,038. September 2009 - September 2011. 

Principal Investigator: Voices National Poll 
W.K. Kellogg Foundation 

Total cost: $100,000. April 2010 - September 2010. 

Principal Investigator: Innovation Bridge - Linking Biotech Breakthroughs to Emerging Vaccine 
Manufacturers 

Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 

Total cost: $100,000. October 2008 - September 2009. 

Principal Investigator: Using MEPS Data to Inform Public-Plan Consumerism 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
Total cost: $99,999. July 2007 - June 2008. 

Principal Investigator: Insurance Coverage of Child, Adolescent, and Adult Vaccines 
Partnership for Prevention 
Total cost: $124,995. May 2006 - October 2007. 

Principal Investigator: Health Tracking 

Center for Studying Health System Change 

Total cost: $97,171. November 2006 - December 2007. 


Davis CV 


4 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Principal Investigator: Future Costs of Childhood Obesity: Estimates and Implications 
United States Department of Agriculture 
Total cost: $150,000. October 2004 - September 2006. 

Principal Investigator: Market Forces or Misinformation? Exploring the Link Between Self-Insuring 
Employers and Underinsurance 

Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Generalist Physician Faculty Scholars Program 
Total cost: $299,769. July 2002 - June 2006. 

Principal Investigator: How Adult Diabetes Interventions Affect Children 
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan Foundation 
Total cost: $10,000. September 2005 - June 2006. 

Principal Investigator: Summer Workshop in Michigan Medicaid Research 
National Poverty Center 
Total cost: $10,000. May 2005 - April 2006. 

Principal Investigator: Increasing Costs of Public-Sector Purchase of Childhood Vaccines 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 

Total cost: $200,693. September 2001 - September 2003. 

Principal Investigator: Evaluation of the Etiologies of Transitions in Children ’s Insurance Status and 
Effects on Healthcare Utilization and Expenditures 

Economic Research Initiative on the Uninsured (Robert Wood Johnson Foundation) 

Total cost: $63,961. April 2003 - December 2004. 

Co-Investigator: Variation in Immunization Practices 
(PI: Gary L. Freed, MD, MPH) 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 

Total cost: $1,400,000. September 2004 - October 2013. 

Co-Investigator: BMI2 - Brief Motivational Interviewing to Reduce Child BMI 
(PI: Kenneth Resnicow, PhD) 

Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute for Child Health and Human Development 
Total cost: $3,416,177. April 2008-June 2013. 

Co-Investigator: Mobilizing Peer Support for Effective Congestive Heart Failure Self-Management 
(PI: Michele Heisler, MD, MPA) 

National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
Total cost: $2,018,444. July 2006 - June 2011. 

Co-Investigator and Faculty Mentor: OB CARES: The Obstetric Clinics and Resources Study 
(PI: Christie Lancaster, MD, MSc) 

Michigan Institute for Clinical & Health Research 
Total cost: $4,644. February 2010 - June 2011. 

Co-Investigator: Pediatric and Managed Care Issues — Medicaid 
(PI: Gary L. Freed) 

State of Michigan Department of Community Health 
Total cost: $1,087,676. October 2005 - September 2006. 

Co-Investigator: Enhancing Private Provider Immunization Recall 
(PI: Kevin J. Dombkowski, DrPH) 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 

Total cost: $600,000. October 2006 - November 2009. 

Co-Investigator and Faculty Mentor: A National Study of Health Care Among Foster Children 
(PI: Sandra H. Jee, MD, MPH) 

Ambulatory Pediatric Association 

Total cost: $10,000. July 2003 - June 2004. 


Davis CV 


5 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Co-Investigator and Faculty Mentor: Healthcare Expenditures and Utilization Among Overweight Youth 
(PI: Ins R. Mabry, MD, MPH) 

National Poverty Center 

Total cost: $9,640. July 2003 - June 2004. 


HONORS AND AWARDS 


National Scholar, Swarthmore College 1985 - 1989 

Garrigues Music Scholar, Swarthmore College 1987 - 1989 

Ivy Award (for contributions to the college community), 1989 

Swarthmore College 

Phi Beta Kappa, Swarthmore College chapter 1989 

Paul Dudley White Fellowship in International Health, 1991, 1993 

Harvard Medical School 

Pediatric Prize, New England Pediatric Society 1994 

Arnold Dunn Award (for compassionate patient care), 1 995 

Brigham and Women's Hospital 

Irving B. Harris Fellow in Child Policy, University of Chicago 1999 - 2000 

Outstanding Educator, Division of General Pediatrics, 200 1 

University of Michigan 

Young Investigator Award in Clinical and Health Services Research, 2001 


Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan 
Milton W. Hamolsky Junior Faculty Award, Society of 

General Internal Medicine, annual national meeting 
Outstanding Abstract, Academy of Health Services Research 
and Health Policy, annual national meeting 
Young Investigator Award in Clinical Research, 

Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan 
Teaching Honor Roll, Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy, 

University of Michigan 

Token of Appreciation from Medical Students, University of 
Michigan Medical School 

National Nemours Award in Child Health Services Research 
Featured Vaccinologist, Human Vaccines 
Associate Chair for Research Award, Department of Pediatrics 
and Communicable Diseases, to support The Michigan 
Child Health Research Priorities (M-CHRP) Project 
Distinguished Mentor Award, Michigan Institute of Clinical and 
Health Research, University of Michigan 
Mentor Recognition for Fellow’s Research Award presented to 
Stephen W. Patrick, Ambulatory Pediatric Association 
Principal Investigator, “WellSpringboard” - First Place Winner 
in Patient- Centered Outcomes Research Institute 
Challenge Initiative 

Principal Investigator, “WellSpringboard” - Second Place Winner 2014 
in Patient- Centered Outcomes Research Institute 
Matchmaking App Challenge 


2002 

2002 

2003 

2004-2006, 2008,2010, 2012, 

2013,2015 

2007, 2009 

2007 

2010 

2012 

2012 

2012 

2013 


Davis CV 


6 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Snyder Memorial Lecturer in Medicine and the Humanities, 2014 

Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, PA 

Visiting Professor, Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia 2014 
Inaugural Visiting Professor in Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, 2015 

Children’s Hospital and Brigham & Women’s Hospital, 

Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 

Visiting Professor, PolicyLab, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia 2015 
Philadelphia, PA 

Regents’ Award for Distinguished Public Service, University of 2015 

Michigan 


MEMBERSHIPS IN PROFESSIONAL SOCIETIES 


Society of General Internal Medicine 1998 - 

Society for Medical Decision-Making 1999 - 

Ambulatory Pediatric Association / Academic Pediatric Association 2000 - 
Association of Teachers of Preventive Medicine 200 1 - 

AcademyHealth (formerly Association of Health Services 200 1 - 

Research and Health Policy) 

American College of Physicians / American Society of 2002 - 

Internal Medicine 

Society for Pediatric Research (elected) 2004 - 


SCIENTIFIC ACTIVITIES 


Chair, Planning Committee for the Robert Wood Johnson Clinical 
Scholars Program annual Health Economics Symposium 
Peer Reviewer, Journal of the Ambulatory Pediatric Association/ 
Ambulatory Pediatrics/Academic Pediatrics 
Peer Reviewer, Journal of General Internal Medicine 
Peer Reviewer, Up-To-Date 

Peer Reviewer, Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine / 
JAMA-Pediatrics 
Peer Reviewer, JAMA 

Peer Reviewer, Journal of Health Policy, Politics, and Law 
Peer Reviewer, Annals of Internal Medicine 
Peer Reviewer, American Journal of Managed Care 
Peer Reviewer, National Poverty Center grants program 
Member, Editorial Board, Ambulatory Pediatrics 
Peer Reviewer, Ambulatory Pediatric Association Y oung Investigators 
Grants Program 

Peer Reviewer, Journal of Policy and Management 
Peer Reviewer, Health Services Research 
Peer Reviewer, Vaccine 

Lead Author, Guidelines for Prevention of Childhood Obesity, 

American Medical Association and American Academy of 


2000 

2000 - 

2000 - 

2000-2003,2010 
2001 - 

2001 - 
2001 - 
2002 - 
2003 - 
2003 - 2006 
2005 - 2007 
2005 - 2007 

2005 - 
2005 - 
2005 - 
2005 - 2007 


Davis CV 


7 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Pediatrics 

Member, Influenza Vaccine Group, American Heart Association 2006 - 

Peer Reviewer, Health Affairs 2006 - 

Study Section Member - Health, Behavior, and Context 2006 

Subcommittee, National Institutes of Health 
Senior Health Researcher, Center for Studying Health System Change, 2006 - 2007 
Washington, DC 

Member, Editorial Board, Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine / JAMA-Pediatrics 

Founding Director, C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on 
Children’s Health, University of Michigan 
Peer Reviewer, New England Journal of Medicine 
Founding Web Editor, Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine / JAMA-Pediatrics 

Study Section Member - Disease, Disability, and Injury Prevention 
and Control Special Emphasis Panel, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention 

Member, Expert Advisory Committee, Measuring Pediatric Access 
to Specialty Health Care by Insurance Status (PI: Karin 
Rhodes, MD, MS; funded by State of Illinois) 

Co-Guest Editor, Special Issue on “Bridging the Gap Between 

Research and Health Policy,” HSR - Health Services Research 
Chair, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health 2011 
Promotion Special Emphasis Panel, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention 

Member, Special Advisory Panel to the Director of the National 2013 - 2014 

Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National 
Institutes of Health 

Member, Special Review Panel, National Institute of Diabetes and 2015 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health 


2007-2013 

2007- 

2008- 

2008- 2013 

2009 

2009- 2012 

2010 - 2012 


TEACHING ACTIVITIES 


Intramural Invited Presentations (selected) 

“Teen problem-solving and its impact on tobacco use.” 1 999 

Grand Rounds, Department of Pediatrics, Pritzker School 
of Medicine, University of Chicago. 

Health Services Research Seminar (semi-annually), 2000 - 

Child Health Evaluation and Research (CHEAR) Unit, 

Division of General Pediatrics, University of Michigan 

“Are parental depressive symptoms linked to underimmunization 200 1 

of young children?” Grand Rounds, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Michigan 

“Smallpox: new challenges from an old foe,” Grand Rounds, 2002 

Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan 


Davis CV 


8 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



“The Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement and Modernization 2004 
Act of 2003: Policy Implications.” Faculty panelist. 

University of Michigan. 

“Obesity trends during childhood and adolescence: insights for 2005 

clinicians and policymakers”. Grand Rounds, Department 
of Pediatrics, 

University of Michigan 

“Obesity trends during childhood and adolescence: findings from 2005 

the PSID-CDS”, invited speaker. Series on the Panel 
Study of Income Dynamics, Institute for Social Research, 

University of Michigan 

“Are the best vaccines still ahead, or already behind us? Costs, 2008 

contradictions, and controversies in childhood immunization,” 

Grand Rounds, Department of Pediatrics and Communicable 
Diseases 

“Health and Health Care in Michigan,” Seminars in Medicine for M3 2008 


curriculum. University of Michigan Medical School 
“Health Care Reform Proposals of the 2008 Candidates for President,” 2008 
Seminars in Medicine for M3 curriculum, University of 
Michigan Medical School 

“Health Care Platforms of the 2008 Presidential Candidates,” 2008 

expert panel convened by the Roosevelt Institution, 

University of Michigan 

“Policy Advice for the Newly Elected President,” expert panel 2008 

convened by Dean Susan Collins of the Gerald R. Ford School 
of Public Policy, University of Michigan 
“When Families Refuse Vaccines,” presentation to the Health Sciences 2009 
Scholars Program for Undergraduates, University of 
Michigan 


“Dilemmas in Development and Delivery of Vaccines,” Bioethics 2009 

Grand Rounds, University of Michigan Health System. 

“Health Care Reform in the US Under President Obama and a 2009 

Democratic Congress,” Special Guest Lecturer, Program in 
Public Policy and International Affairs, University of Michigan 
“Fresh Challenges in Development and Delivery of Vaccines,” 2009 

Grand Rounds, Department of Pediatrics and Communicable 
Diseases, University of Michigan 

“Health Care Reform: Proposals, Politics, and Prospects,” 2009 


Special Panel Symposium, Gerald R. Ford School of Public 
Policy, University of Michigan 

“What Type of Health Care Reform Would be Best for Primary Care?” 2009 
Featured Speaker for Primary Care Week, University of 
Michigan Medical School 

“Financing Development of Drugs and V accines for Neglected 2010 

Diseases,” Faculty Commentator, Gerald R. Ford School of 
Public Policy, University of Michigan 

“Making Sense of Health Policy Reform: Latest Events, Greatest 2010 
Hopes,” Grand Rounds, Department of Pediatrics and 


Davis CV 


9 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Communicable Diseases 

“(False) Summits and (True) Profits: Health Care Reform m the 2010 

United States,” Grand Rounds, Department of Internal 
Medicine 

“Public Preferences for Participation in Medical Research,” Grand 2011 
Rounds, Department of Pediatrics and Communicable 
Diseases 

“Quality of Health Care and the Affordable Care Act,” guest 2011 

speaker in Health Care Reform in the U.S., taught by 
Jill Horwitz at University of Michigan Law School 

“Policy Analysis vs Policy Advocacy,” guest speaker in HMP 615- 2011 

Introduction to Public Health Policy at University of 
Michigan School of Public Health 

“Presidents, Precedents, and Healthcare Reform in the United States,” 2012 - 
Guest Lecturer in History 234 for undergraduate students 
at University of Michigan; lead faculty: Joel Howell, MD, PhD 

“Teen Pregnancy, Infant Mortality and the Public Voice: New 2012 

Approaches to Old Problems at the Nexus of Maternal 
and Child Health,” Grand Rounds, Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, University of Michigan Health System 

“Priorities for the Health and Healthcare of Michigan’s Children: 2013 

Perspectives from Lansing,” Grand Rounds, Department 
of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of 
Michigan Health System 

“Presidential Politics for 2016: How Will Health Policy Play a Role?” 2015 
Grand Rounds, Department of Anesthesiology, University 
of Michigan Health System 

“Health Policymaking in Michigan: a View from the Inside,” Grand 2015 
Rounds, Department of Pediatrics and Communicable 
Diseases, University of Michigan Health System 

Courses and Seminars 


2000 


2003 

2006 


2004, 2008 


Primary Care Internal Medicine weekly morning report, 1997 

Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 
Internal Medicine resident journal club, faculty lead. University of 1999 - 
Chicago 

“Introduction to the Patient: Health Policy,” small group section leader, 200 1 
Year 2 curriculum. University of Michigan Medical School 
“Medical Decision-Making,” small group section leader, 200 1 - 

Year 2 curriculum. University of Michigan Medical School 
Public Policy 740, Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy: 2002 - 

“Issues in Child and Family Health Policy,” a full-semester, 

3-credit course for master’s level students 
“Threats to Successes in Child Health Policy in the United States,” 2003 - 
instructor for health policy module in the Public Policy and 
International Affairs program for minority undergraduates at 
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy, University of 


Davis CV 


10 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Michigan 

“Health Economics and Health Policy,” lead instructor for segment 
of Clinical Foundations of Medicine course. Years 1, 2, and 3 
curriculum. University of Michigan Medical School 

Public Policy 700, Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy: 

“Independent Study” for master’s level students as 3 -credit, 
full-semester course 

Public Policy 768, Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy: 

“Efforts at Health Care Reform in the United States - 
Past, Present, and Future,” a full-semester, 3-credit course for 
master’s-level students 

Public Policy 495, Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy: 

“Principles and Realities of Health Care Reform,” a full- 
semester, 3 -credit course for upper-level undergraduate 
students 

Health and Health Care Research 740 and 741, Rackham School of 
Graduate Studies, “Research on Organization, Financing, and 
Delivery of Health Care,” two full-semester 3-credit courses 
for physician-investigators-in-training 

“Containing Health Care Costs,” originator and lead instructor for 
annual M2 elective course, 6 hours of class time 

“History of Health Care Reform in the United States,” instructor for 
health policy module in the Public Policy and International 
Affairs program for minority undergraduates at Gerald R. 

Ford School of Public Policy, University of Michigan 

“Understanding and Improving the US Healthcare System,” 

lead developer and lead faculty for massive open online course 
provided on the global Coursera platform 

Public Policy 750, Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy: “Medicaid 
as an Innovative and Challenging Safety Net,” a half-semester, 
1 -credit course for master’s-level students 

Clinical Mentorship 

Internal Medicine & Pediatrics residency program, weekly 

resident continuity clinic preceptor at Canton Health Center, 
University of Michigan 

Internal Medicine & Pediatrics residency program, ad hoc 

resident continuity clinic preceptor at Canton Health Center, 
University of Michigan 

Research Mentorship 

Internal Medicine & Pediatrics residency program, 

resident research mentor. University of Michigan 
(1-3 residents mentored each academic year) 

Core Faculty, Pediatric Health Services Research Fellowship Program, 
Division of General Pediatrics, University of Michigan 


2006- 

2006- 

2008, 2010, 2012, 2013 

2008 

2008 - 

2010-2014 

2011,2013,2015 

2013 - 
2015 

July 2000 - December 2006 
January 2007 - 

July 2000 - 
July 2000 - 


Davis CV 


11 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



(1-4 fellows mentored each academic year) 

Affiliated Faculty, Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program, 
University of Michigan (1-2 fellows mentored each academic 
year) 

Core Faculty, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Clinical Scholars 
Program, University of Michigan (3-10 fellows mentored 
each academic year) 


COMMITTEE AND ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE 


Admissions Committee, Harvard Medical School 
Residency Selection Committee, Harvard Combined Program in 
Medicine and Pediatrics 

Member, Residency Selection Committee, Departments of Pediatrics 
and Communicable Diseases and Internal Medicine, 
University of Michigan 

Member, Resident Research Committee, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Michigan 

Member of Judging Panel, Annual Resident Research Day, 

St. Joseph Mercy Hospital, Ann Arbor, Michigan 
Member, 2006 Annual Meeting Planning Committee, AcademyHealth 
Lead Faculty Advisor, Medical School and Gerald R. Ford School 
of Public Policy Dual Degree MD/MPP Program, 

University of Michigan 

Pediatric Clinical Research Committee, University of Michigan 
Member, External Planning Committee, Annual National 
Immunization Conference 

Faculty Lead, Medical School coursework in Health Policy and 

Health Economics, Ml -M3 years, University of Michigan 
Member, Instructional Track Appointments, Promotions, and Tenure 
Committee, Department of Pediatrics and Communicable 
Diseases, University of Michigan 
Member, Grand Rounds Committee, Department of Pediatrics and 
Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan 
Member, Child Health Initiative Working Group, Michigan Institute 
for Clinical and Health Research (MICHR), University of 
Michigan 

Member, Search Committee, Founding Director of the Institute of 
Healthcare Policy and Innovation, University of Michigan 
Member, Harvard Medical School Alumni Council 
Co-Chair, Inaugural Events for the Institute for Healthcare Policy 
and Innovation, University of Michigan 
Member, Research and Policy Committee, Center for Healthcare 
Research and Transformation 

Member, Selection Committee for the Michigan Institute of 

Clinical and Health Research (MICHR) Mentor Award 
Member, Institute Leadership Team, Institute for Healthcare Policy 


Davis CV 


12 


July 2000 - June 2004 
July 2004 - 


1991 - 1992 
1994 - 1998 

2002 - 2006 

2003 - 2006 

2004 - 2005 

2005 - 2006 
2006- 

2008 

2008 - 2009 
2008 - 
2010-2014 

2010-2012 

2010-2011 

2010-2011 

2011 -2014 

2012- 2013 

2012 - 
2013 - 

2013- 

Last updated: 10/1/2015 



and Innovation, University of Michigan 
Member, Search Committee for Associate Dean for Clinical and 
Translational Research, University of Michigan 


EXTRAMURAL INVITED PRESENTATIONS 


“Methodological issues in the application of quality -adjusted 

life-years to interventions regarding children.” Presentation 
at Environmental Protection Agency of white paper submitted 
as background for the Child Health Evaluation Handbook, 
Washington, DC. 

“Vaccine shortages and vaccine economics.” Presented at the 
National Immunization Program, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA. 

“Increasing costs of public-sector purchase of childhood vaccines.” 
Presented at the National Immunization Program, 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 

Atlanta, GA. 

“Insurance transitions for children and adults.” Grand Rounds, 
Harvard Combined Program in Internal Medicine and 
Pediatrics, Boston, MA. 

“Adult vaccine benefit coverage in employer-sponsored health plans.” 
Presented at the National Immunization Program, 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA. 

“Insurance coverage of vaccines.” Presented to the National Vaccine 
Advisory Committee, Washington, DC. 

“Considering the costs of vaccines.” Presented at the National 
Immunization Program, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, GA. 

“Old challenges, new opportunities in insurance coverage for 
adult vaccines.” Presented to the National Vaccine 
Advisory Committee, Washington, DC. 

“Addressing children’s underinsurance through policy-relevant 

research.” Presented within Pediatric Academic Societies 
Topic Symposium, “From Health Services Research to 
Public Policy,” at annual PAS meeting, San Francisco, CA. 

“Counting the costs of childhood obesity.” Grand Rounds, 

Department of Pediatrics, Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, MI. 

“Vaccine financing strategies and industry research opportunities: 
the global perspective.” Plenary presentation at the World 
Vaccine Congress, Washington, DC. 

“Innovation Bridge: New vaccines, new partnerships.” Plenary 
presentation at the Developing Country Vaccine 
Manufacturers Network 10 th annual meeting, Beijing, China. 

“Health care reform in the United States.” Featured speaker at 
town hall meeting, Northville, MI. 

“Opportunities for health care reform during the Obama 


2015 

June 2001 

March 2002 
March 2003 

June 2003 

March 2004 

February 2005 
March 2005 

November 2005 

May 2006 

October 2006 
April 2009 

September 2009 

October 2009 
November 2009 


Davis CV 


13 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



administration.” Featured speaker at quarterly meeting of the 
Washtenaw County Medical Society, Ann Arbor, MI. 

“A critical examination of legislative options for health care reform.” 
Department of Internal Medicine Journal Club, Saint Joseph 
Mercy Health System, Aim Arbor, MI. 

'‘Making sense of health policy reform.” Grand Rounds, Department 
of Internal Medicine, Saint Joseph Mercy Hospital, 

Ann Arbor, MI. 

“Fresh challenges in the development and delivery of vaccines.” 
Grand Rounds, Department of Pediatrics, Beaumont 
Hospital, Royal Oak, MI. 

“Illuminating the global R&D pipeline for prophylactic vaccines.” 
Featured speaker, special presentation. International 
AIDS Vaccine Initiative, New York, NY. 

“Understanding challenges and opportunities in research and 

development of prophylactic vaccines.” Featured guest 
lecturer, Bloomberg School of Public Health, The Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD. 

“Characterizing and understanding the R&D pipeline for prophylactic 
vaccines.” Presented at National Center for Influenza 
and Respiratory Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, GA. 

“National Voices Project.” Featured panel presenter at America 
Healing national meeting of grantees of the W.K. Kellogg 
Foundation, Asheville, NC. 

“Failings in pediatrics (and what health services research can do 

about them).” Featured faculty presenter, 1 st Annual Child 
Health Services Research Symposium, Indiana University 
Purdue University at Indianapolis, Indianapolis, IN. 

“Addressing significant unmet needs through world class vaccine 
pipelines.” Featured plenary speaker. World Vaccine 
Congress, Lyon, France. 

“Challenges and opportunities in research, development and financing 
of prophylactic vaccines.” Featured guest lecturer, 

Bloomberg School of Public Health, The Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD. 

“Challenges and successes in new vaccine development for adults.” 
Grand Rounds speaker. Saint John’s Hospital, Detroit, MI. 

“National Voices Project.” Featured panel presenter at America 
Healing national meeting of grantees of the W.K. Kellogg 
Foundation, Asheville, NC. 

“Clinical implications of healthcare reform for academic medical 
centers.” Association of Academic Internal Medicine 
annual meeting. New Orleans, LA. 

“Making progress but losing ground: the quicksand of infant mortality 
in the United States.” Snyder Memorial Lecture, Swarthmore 
College, Swarthmore, PA. 

“The Million Hearts Initiative: Can the Affordable Care Act 


Davis CV 


14 


December 2009 
March 2010 
June 2010 
December 2010 
March 2011 

April 2011 

May 2011 
September 2011 

October 2011 
February 2012 

October 2012 
April 2013 

October 2013 

March 2014 

May 2014 

Last updated: 10/1/2015 



deliver?” Million Hearts Initiative Workshop, Okemos, MI. 

“What if we asked the public?” Grand Rounds presentation. Royal 
Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia. 

“Infant mortality as a state health priority and key index of 
population health in Michigan.” Health Policy guest 
lecturer, Oakland University William Beaumont Medical 
School, Troy, MI. 

“Health services research and impact of the field of infant mortality 
research.” Keynote speaker, annual meeting of the Midwest 
Society of Pediatric Research, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, 

OH. 

“What if we asked the public? Measuring attitudes, influencing policy.” 
Grand Rounds presentation. Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA. 

“From affecting to effecting health policy: focusing on population 
health as a physician, researcher, and government official.” 
Grand Rounds presentation, Brigham & Women’s Hospital, 
Boston, MA. 

“Importance of addressing neonatal abstinence syndrome in Michigan.” 
Keynote address for statewide symposium: NAS — Primary 
and Secondary Prevention; a Team Approach. Okemos, MI. 

“In tlie belly of the policy beast: Data, debate, and the value of the 

academic voice.” PolicyLab Seminar presentation. Children’s 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA. 

“MHA Keystone Pain Management: Why, who, what, how?” 

Keynote address, Michigan Health and Hospitals Association 
Keystone Symposium, Dearborn, MI. 


SELECTED OTHER PRESENTATIONS 


“Parental depression as a determinant of undervaccination among 
preschool-aged children.” Plenary presentation, 

Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program 
annual meeting. Ft. Lauderdale, FL. 

“The future of childhood vaccine costs in the public sector.” 
Platform presentation, Robert Wood Johnson Clinical 
Scholars Program annual meeting. Ft. Lauderdale, FL. 

“Cost-effectiveness analysis of immunization strategies regarding 
smallpox bioterrorism.” Platform presentation, 

Society of General Internal Medicine annual meeting, 
Atlanta, GA. 

“State-level demographic, economic, and political factors associated 
with children’s vaccination rates.” Oral presentation, 
AcademyHealth annual meeting, Washington, D.C. 

“Factors associated with transitions in children’s health insurance.” 
Platform presentation. Pediatric Academic Societies 
annual meeting, Seattle, WA. 

“Projected economic impact of childhood vaccine shortages.” 


August 2014 
October 2014 

October 2014 

January 2015 
January 2015 

May 2015 
May 2015 
May 2015 

November 2000 

November 2001 
May 2002 

June 2002 
May 2003 
May 2003 


Davis CV 


15 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Platform presentation. Pediatric Academic Societies 
annual meeting, Seattle, WA. 

"Decline in varicella-related hospitalizations and expenditures after 
introduction of varicella vaccine.” Platform presentation. 
Pediatric Academic Societies annual meeting, 

San Francisco, CA. 

“State school and daycare entry laws associated with higher varicella 
immunization rates.” Platform presentation. Pediatric 
Academic Societies annual meeting, San Francisco, CA. 

“Healthcare utilization and expenditures associated with adults' 

transitions in health insurance status.” Platform presentation. 
Society of General Internal Medicine annual meeting, 
Chicago, IL. 

“Preferences and tradeoffs for preventive services in health plans.” 
Platform presentation. Society of General Internal Medicine 
annual meeting, Chicago, IL. 

"Attitudes of medical subspecialists regarding influenza vaccine." 

Oral presentation. National Immunization Conference, 
Nashville, TN. 

“Benefits coverage for adult vaccines in employer-sponsored 

health plans.” Oral presentation. National Immunization 
Conference, Nashville, TN. 

“Assessing the potential effect of programmatic changes in Medicaid 
and SCHIP on children’s uninsured rates.” Research panel 
presentation at the 2005 annual Child Health Services 
Research Meeting of AcademyHealth, Washington, D.C. 

“How many successes and how many failures? Vaccine development 
in the United States, 1995-2008.” Oral presentation. 

National Immunization Conference, Dallas, TX. 

“How many successes and how many failures? Vaccine development 
in the United States, 1995-2008.” Oral symposium 
presentation. Pediatric Academic Societies annual meeting, 
Baltimore, MD. 

“Implications of national health care reform for the University of 
Michigan Health System.” Presentation to the Regents of 
the University of Michigan. 

“Implications of racial/ethnic diversity for health in the United 

States — 2030.” Featured speaker. Society 2030 meeting. 
Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan. 

“Focusing on passion, difference, and service.” Keynote presentation 
at graduation of the Michigan Health Sciences Summer 
Institute / Undergraduate Research Academy, University 
of Michigan. 


May 2004 

May 2004 
May 2004 

May 2004 
March 2004 
March 2004 
June 2005 

March 2009 
May 2009 

May 2010 
June 2011 
August 2014 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Davis CV 


16 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Peer-Reviewed Publications 


1) Davis FB, Bias SD, Davis MM, Davis PJ. Analogue-specific action in vitro of atrial natriuretic factor 
on human red blood cell Ca2+-ATPase activity. Hypertension. 1988;12:428-433. 

2) Davis MM, Andreae M, Freed GL. Physicians’ early challenges related to the pneumococcal 
conjugate vaccine. Ambul Pediatr 2001;1:302-305. 

3) Kemper AR, Davis MM, Freed GL. Expected adverse events in a smallpox vaccination campaign for 
children and young adults. EffClinPract 2002;5:84-90. 

4) Freed GL, Davis MM, Andreae MC, Bass S, Weinblatt H. Reimbursement for Prevnar: A modern- 
day version of Flercules and the Hydra. Pediatrics. 2002;1 10:399-400. 

5) Davis MM, McMahon SR, Santoli JM, Schwartz B, Clark SJ. A national survey of physician 
practices regarding influenza vaccine. J Gen Intern Med 2002;17:670-676. 

6) Cabana MD, Aiken KD, Davis MM, Freed GL, Clark SJ. Combined effect of changes in guideline 
recommendations and immunization financing policy on nursery immunizations. Ambul Pediatr 
2002;2:367-374. 

7) Davis MM, Zimmerman JL, Wheeler JRC, Freed GL. The costs of childhood vaccine purchase in 
the public sector: past trends, future expectations. Am J Public Health. 2002;92: 1982-1987. 

8) Freed GL, Davis MM, Clark SJ. Variation in public and private supply of pneumococcal conjugate 
vaccine during a shortage. JAMA. 2003;289:575-578. 

9) Kemper AR, Davis MM. Under scrutiny: smallpox vaccine recommendations. Expert Opin 
Pharmacother. 2003;4:1207-1214. 

10) Davis MM, Ndiaye SM, Freed GL, Kim CS, Clark SJ. Influence of insurance status and vaccine cost 
on physicians’ administration of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine. Pediatrics. 2003;1 12:521-526. 

1 1) Davis MM, Ndiaye SM, Freed GL, Clark SJ. One-year uptake of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine: a 
national survey of family physicians and pediatricians. J Am Board Fam Pract. 2003;16:363-371. 

12) Cabana MD, Rand C, Slish K, Nan B, Davis MM, Clark N. Pediatrician self-efficacy for counseling 
parents of asthmatic children to quit smoking. Pediatrics. 2004;1 13:78-81. 

13) Davis MM, Wortley PM, Ndiaye SM, Woods MG, Clark SJ. Availability of influenza vaccine 
among medical subspecialty practices: a national survey. Am JPrevMed. 2004;26:307-310. 

14) Pollack HA, Dombkowski KJ, Zimmerman JB, Davis MM, Cowan AE, Wheeler JRC, Hillemeier 
AC, Freed GL. Emergency department use among Michigan children with special health care needs: 
an introductory study. Health Serv Res. 2004;39:665-692. 

15) Aiken KD, Freed GL, Davis MM. When insurance status isn’t static: insurance transitions for low- 
income children and implications for health and health care. Ambul Pediatr 2004;4:237-243. 

16) Flynn HA, Davis MM, Marcus SM, Cunningham R, Blow FC. Rates of maternal depression in 
pediatric emergency department and relationship to child service utilization. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 
2004;26:316-322. 

17) Davis MM, Upston AM. State legislator gender and other characteristics associated with sponsorship 
of child health bills. Ambul Pediatr 2004;4:295-302. 

18) Jee SH, Davis MM. Factors associated with variations in parental social support in primary care 
pediatric settings. Ambul Pediatr 2004;4:316-322. 

19) Davis MM, Patel MS, Gebremariam A. Decline in varicella-related hospitalizations and expenditures 
for children and adults after introduction of varicella vaccine in the United States. Pediatrics. 
2004;114:786-792. 

20) Odetola O, Clark SJ, Freed GL, Bratton SL, Davis MM. A national survey of the distribution of 
pediatric critical care resources in the United States. Pediatrics. 2005; 1 15:382-386. 

21) Kemper AR, Cowan AE, Ching PL, Davis MM, Kennedy E, Clark SJ, Freed GL. Hospital decision- 
making regarding the smallpox pre-event vaccination program. Biosecur Bioterr. 2005;3:23-30. 


Davis CV 


17 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



22) Davis MM, Gaglia M. Association of daycare and school entry vaccination requirements with 
varicella immunization rates. Vaccine. 2005;23:3053-3060. 

23) Davis MM, Fant KE. Coverage of vaccines in private health plans: what does the public prefer? 
Health Aff. 2005;24:770-779. 

24) Davis MM, Flalasyamani LK, Sneller V-P, Bishop KR, Clark SJ. Provider response to different 
formats of the adult immunization schedule. Am J PrevMed. 2005;29:34-40. 

25) Odetola O. Miller W, Davis M, Bratton S. The relationship between the location of pediatric 
intensive care unit facilities and child death from trauma: a county-level ecologic study. J Pediatr. 
2005;147:74-77. 

26) Yoon EY, Davis MM, Van Cleave J, Maheshwari S, Cabana MD. Factors associated with non- 
attendance at pediatric subspecialty asthma clinics. J Asthma. 2005;42:555-559. 

27) Gopal S, Davis MM. Improving delivery of influenza vaccine to nonelderly persons with 
cardiovascular disease, with and without sufficient national supply of vaccine: a decision analysis. 
Hum Vaccin. 2005;1:217-223. 

28) Odetola FO, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Growth, development and failure to thrive: Factors that underlie 
the availability of pediatric critical care facilities in the United States. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2006; 
7:70-73. 

29) Davis MM, Slish K, Chao C, Cabana MD. National trends in bariatric surgery, 1996-2002. Arch 
Surg. 2006;141:71-74. 

30) Yoon EY, Davis MM, El-Essawi H, Cabana MD. FDA labeling status of pediatric medications. Clin 
Pediatr (Philo)). 2006;45:75-78. 

3 1) Lee JM, Davis MM, Clark SJ, Hofer TJ, Kemper AR. Estimated cost-effectiveness of growth 
hormone therapy for idiopathic short stature. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2006; 160:263-269. 

32) Patel MS, Davis MM. Could a federal program promoting influenza vaccination among elders be 
cost-effective? PrevMed. 2006;42:240-246. 

33) Gaglia MA, Davis MM. States’ emergency orders regarding the 2004-05 influenza vaccine shortage. 
Hum Vaccin. 2006;2:34-37. 

34) Davis MM. Successes and remaining challenges after 10 years of varicella vaccination in the United 
States. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2006;5:295-302. 

35) Cowan AE, Winston CA, Davis MM, Wortley PM, Clark SJ. Influenza vaccination status and 
influenza-related attitudes and practices among US physicians. Am J Infect Control. 2006;34: 164- 
169. 

36) Jee SH, Barth RP, Szilagyi MA, Szilagyi PG, Aida M, Davis MM. Factors associated with chronic 
conditions among children in foster care. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 2006;17:328-341. 

37) Kemper AR, Dombkowski KJ, Menon RK, Davis MM. Trends in diabetes mellitus among privately 
insured children, 1998-2002. Ambul Pediatr. 2006;6:178-181. 

38) Odetola F, Tilford JM, Davis MM. Variation in the use of intracranial pressure monitoring and 
mortality in critically ill children with meningitis in the United States. Pediatrics. 2006;1 17: 1893- 
1900. 

39) Flynn HA, Cain SA, O’Mahen HA, Davis MM. Detection of maternal alcohol use problems in the 
pediatric emergency department. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2006;30: 1 160-1164. 

40) Mmeje O, Davis MM. Will coverage for child and adolescent immunizations be mandated in 
insurance plans in 2006? Lessons learned from the Newborns and Mothers Health Protection Act of 
1996. Pediatrics. 2006;118:388-392. 

41) Davis MM, Broder KR, Cowan AE, Mijalski C, Kretsinger K, Stokley S, Clark SJ. Physician 
attitudes and preferences regarding new combined tetanus-diphtheria-acellular pertussis vaccines for 
adolescents in the United States. AmerJPrevMed. 2006;31:176-180. 

42) Patel UD, Davis MM. Physicians’ attitudes and practices regarding adherence to medical regimens 


Davis CV 


18 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



by patients with chronic illness. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2006;45:439-45. 

43) Patel UD. Davis MM. Falling into the doughnut hole: drug spending among beneficiaries with end- 
stage renal disease under Medicare Part D plans. Am J Nephrol. 2006; 17: 2546-2553. 

44) Gurney JG, McPheeters ML, Davis MM. Flealth conditions and health care utilization among 
children with and without autism: National Survey of Children’s Health. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2006;160:825-830. 

45) Dombkowski KJ, Davis MM, Cohn L, Clark SJ. Potential for improving influenza vaccination rates 
among children with asthma. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2006;160:966-971. 

46) Davis MM, Taubert K, Benin AL, Brown DW, Mensah GA, Baddour LM, Dunbar S, Krumholz HM. 
Influenza vaccination as secondary prevention for cardiovascular disease. Circulation. 
2006;114:1549-1553. 

47) Van Cleave J, Davis MM. Bullying behaviors and children with special health care needs in a 
national sample. Pediatrics. 2006;118:1212-1219. 

48) Okumura M, Campbell A, Nasr S, Davis MM. Inpatient health care utilization among adult survivors 
of chronic childhood illnesses in the United States. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2006;160:1054-1060. 

49) Lee JM, Okumura M, Davis MM, Herman WH, Gurney JG. Prevalence and determinants of insulin 
resistance among U.S. adolescents: a population based study. Diabetes Care. 2006;29:2427-2432. 

50) Clark SJ, Adolphe S, Davis MM, Cowan AE, Kretsinger K. Attitudes of U.S. obstetricians toward a 
combined tetanus-diphtheria-acellular pertussis vaccine for adults. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol. 
2006;2006:1-5. 

5 1) Odetola FO, Shanley TP, Gurney JG, Clark SJ, Dechert RE, Freed GL, Davis MM. Characteristics 
and outcomes of inter-hospital transfers from Level II to Level I pediatric intensive care units. 

Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2006;7:536-540. 

52) Clark SJ, Cowan AE, Stokley S, Bilukha O, Davis MM. Physician perspectives to inform a new 
meningococcal conjugate vaccine (MCV4) recommendation. J Adolesc Health. 2006;39:850-855. 

53) Dempsey AF, Davis MM. Overcoming barriers to adherence to HPV vaccination recommendations. 
Am J Manag Care. 2006;12:S484-S491. 

54) Laroche HH, Hofer TP, Davis MM. Adult fat intake associated with the presence of children in 
households: findings from NHANES III. J Am Board Fam Med. 2007;20:9-15. 

55) Davis MM, Patel MS, Halasyamani L. Variation in estimated Medicare prescription drug plan costs 
and affordability for beneficiaries living in different states. J Gen Intern Med. 2007;22:257-263. 

56) Davis MM, Marin M, Cowan AE, Guris D, Clark SJ. Physician attitudes regarding breakthrough 
varicella disease and apotential second dose of varicella vaccine. Pediatrics. 2007;119:258-264. 

57) Lee JM, Davis MM, Clark SJ, Kemper AR. Threshold of evaluation for short stature in a pediatric 
specialty clinic: differences between boys versus girls? J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2007; 20:21-26. 

58) Woolford SJ, Clark SJ, Lumeng JC, Williams DR, Davis MM. Maternal perspectives on growth and 
nutrition counseling provided at preschool well-child visits. J Natl Med Assoc. 2007;99:153-158. 

59) Davis MM, Halasyamani LK. Conflicting measures of hospital quality: ratings from ‘Hospital 
Compare’ versus ‘Best Hospitals.’ JHospMed. 2007;2:128-134. 

60) Davis MM, Kretsinger K, Cowan AE, Stokely S, Clark SJ. New combined tetanus-diphtheria- 
acellular pertussis vaccines for adults: primary' care physician attitudes and preferences. Hum Vaccin. 
2007; published online, available at: 

http://www.iandesbioscience.com/ioumals/vaccines/abstract.php?id :; 4307 . 

61) Yoon EY, Dombkowski KJ, Rocchini A, Lin JJ, Davis MM. Off-label utilization of antihypertensive 
medications in children. Ambul Pediatr. 2007;7:299-303. 

62) Woolford S, Clark S J, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Inpatient hospital charges associated with 
obesity' as a secondary' diagnosis in children. Obesity. 2007;15: 1895-1901. 

63) Okumura MJ, McPheeters M, Davis MM. State and national estimates of insurance coverage and 


Davis CV 


19 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



health care utilization for adolescents with chronic conditions from the National Survey of Children’s 
Health Survey, 2003. J Adolesc Health. 2007;41:343-349. 

64) Lee JM. Okumura MJ. Freed GL, Menon RK, Davis MM. Trends in hospitalizations for diabetes 
among children and young adults - United States, 1993-2004. Diabetes Care. 2007;30:3035-3039. 

65) Davis MM, Gance- Cleveland B. Hassink S, Johnson R. Paradis G, Resnicow K. Recommendations 
for prevention of childhood obesity. Pediatrics. 2007;120:S229-S253. 

66) Van Cleave J, Heisler M, DeVries JM, Joiner TA, Davis MM. Discussion of illness during well- 
child visits with parents of children with and without special health care needs. Arch Pediatr Adolesc 
Med. 2007;161:1170-1175. 

67) Laroche HH, Davis MM, Forman J, Palmisano G, Heisler M. What about the children? The 
experience of families involved in an adult-focused diabetes intervention. Public Health Nutr. 2007; 
published online, available at: 

http://joumaIs.cambridge.org/download.phE?file= 5 %2FPHN%2FS1368980007000791a.pd.f&code~ldf 
0b2009 1 7 a 3 4cj d I e 3 a i a9fe I 45t>0df. 

68) Odetola FO, Rosenberg AL, Davis MM, Clark SJ, Dechert RE, Shanley TP. Do outcomes vary 
according to the source of admission to the pediatric intensive care unit? Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2008;9:20-25. 

69) Schilling PL, Davis MM, Albanese CT, Dutta S, Morton J. National trends in adolescent bariatric 
surgical procedures and implications for surgical centers of excellence. Bull Am Coll Surg. 
2008;206:1-12. 

70) Lee JM, Davis MM, Menon RK, Freed GL. The geographic distribution of childhood diabetes and 
obesity to the supply of pediatric endocrinologists in the US. J Pediatr. 2008; 152;33 1-336. 

71) Woolford SJ, Davis MM, Gebremariam A, Strecher V. Physicians’ perspectives on increasing the 
use of BMI charts for young children. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2008;47:573-577. 

72) Davis MM, Wortley PM, Ndiaye SM, Cowan AE, Osta AD, Clark SJ. Vaccinating high-risk non- 
elderly adults against influenza: a national survey of subspecialists. Human Vaccines. 2008;4:229- 
233. 

73) Zivin K, McCammon RJ, Davis MM, Halasyamani LK, Kales HC. Increases in Medicare 
prescription drug plan costs attributable to psychotropic medications. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 
2008;16:674-685. 

74) Dempsey AF, Cowan AE, Stokley S, Messonnier M, Clark SJ, Davis MM. The role of economic 
information in decision-making by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Vaccine. 
2008;26:5389-5392. 

75) Laroche HH, Heisler M, Forman J, Anderson M, Davis MM. When adults with diabetes attempt to 
drink less soda: resulting adult-child interactions and household changes. J Natl Med Assoc. 
2008;100:1004-1011. 

76) Caskey RN, Davis MM. Differences in end-of-Iife hospital care for children, associated with age, 
transfer status, and insurance coverage for children. J Hosp Med 2008;3(5):376-83. 

77) Tarini BA, Singer DC, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Parental concerns about genetic disease risk: the effects 
of family history and genetic test results. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2008;162:1079-1083. 

78) Harari N, Davis MM, Heisler M. Strangers in a strange land: health care experiences for recent 
Latino immigrants in Midwest communities. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 2008;19: 1350-1367. 

79) Davis MM, McGonagle K, Schoeni RF, Stafford F. Relative associations of parental and 
grandparental obesity with risk of childhood overweight: implications for primary care practice. J 
Am Board Fam Med. 2008;21:549-554. 

80) Patel MS, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Herpes zoster-related hospitalizations and expenditures 
before and after introduction of varicella vaccine in the United States. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
2008;29:1157-1163. 


Davis CV 


20 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



81) Danziger S, Davis MM, Orzol S, Pollack HA. Health insurance and access to care among welfare 
leavers. Inquiry. 2008;45:184-197. 

82) Van Cleave J, Davis MM. Preventive care utilization among children with and without special health 
care needs: associations with unmet need. Ambul Pediatr. 2008;8:305-3 1 1 . 

83) Okumura MJ. Heisler M, Davis MM, Cabana MD, Demonner S, Kerr EA. Comfort of general 
internists and general pediatricians in providing care for young adults with chronic illnesses of 
childhood. J Gen Intern Med. 2008;23:1621-1627. 

84) Hoilette LK, Clark S J, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Usual source of care and unmet need among 
vulnerable children: 1998-2006. Pediatrics. 2009;123:e214-e219. 

85) Yoon EY, Davis MM, Rocchini A, Kershaw D, Freed GL. Medical management of children with 
primary hypertension by pediatric subspecialists. Pediatr Nephrol. 2009;24:147-153. 

86) Macy ML, Stanley RM, Lozon MM, Sasson C, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Trends in high- 
turnover stays among children hospitalized in the United States - 1993-2003. Pediatrics. 
2009;123:996-1002. 

87) Woolford SJ, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Persistent gap of incremental charges for 
obesity as a secondary diagnosis in common pediatric hospitalizations. J Hosp Med. 2009;4: 149- 
156. 

88) Odetola F, Davis MM, Cohn L, Clark SJ. Interhospital transfer of critically ill and injured children: 
an evaluation of transfer patterns, resource utilization, and clinical outcomes. JHosp Med. 
2009;4:164-170. 

89) Hassan F, Lewis TC, Davis MM, Gebremariam A, Dombkowski KJ. Hospital utilization and charges 
among children with influenza, 2003. Amer J Prev Med. 2009;36:292-296. 

90) Dempsey AF, Espinosa C, Davis MM. Unintended vaccination of pregnant adolescents: Estimating 
the scope of the problem and the impact of different pregnancy testing strategies. Vaccine. 
2009;27:3536-3543. 

91) Yoon EY, Davis MM, Freed GL, Clark SJ. Formulary coverage for lipid-lowering drugs 
recommended for children. Clinical Pediatrics. 2009;48:609-613. 

92) Lee JM, Gebremariam A, Card-Higginson P, Shaw JL, Thompson JW, Davis MM. Poor 
performance of body mass index as a marker for hypercholesterolemia in children and adolescents. 
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2009; 1 63 : 7 1 6-723. 

93) Tarini BA, Singer DC, Butchart AT, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Parents’ interest in predictive genetic 
testing for their children when a disease has no effective treatment. Pediatrics. 2009;124:e432-e438. 

94) Patel MS, Lypson ML, Davis MM. Medical student perceptions of education in health care systems. 
Acad Med. 2009;84:1301-1306. 

95) Dempsey AF, Singer DC, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Parents’ views on three shot-related visits: 
Implications for use of adolescent vaccines like human papillomavirus vaccine. Acad Pediatrics. 
2009;9:348-352. 

96) Yoon EY, Davis MM, Kershaw, D, Clark SJ. Formulary coverage for antihypertensive drugs used in 
children. Am J P harm Benefits. 2009;1:145-149. 

97) Dempsey AF, Singer DC, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Adolescent preventive healthcare: what do parents 
want? J Pediatr. 2009;155:689-694. 

98) Laroche HH, Davis MM, Forman J, Palmisano G, Reisinger HS, Tannas C, Spencer M, Heisler M. 
Children’s roles in parents’ diabetes self-management. Amer Jour Prev Med. 2009;37(6S1):S251- 
S261. 

99) Davis RN, Caldwell C, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Depressive symptoms in non-resident African 
American fathers and involvement with their sons. Pediatrics. 2009;124: 161 1-1618. 

100) Lee JM, Pilli S, Gebremariam A, Keirns CC, Davis MM, Vijan S, Freed GL, Herman WH, Gurney 
JG. Getting heavier, younger: trajectories of obesity over the life course. IntJ Obes (Lond). 2009 


Davis CV 


21 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Dec 1 . [Epub ahead of print] 

101) Woolford SJ, Clark SJ, Ahmed AR, Davis MM. Feasibility and acceptability of a one-page tool to 
help physicians assess and discuss obesity with parents of preschoolers. Clin Pediatr. 2009;48:954- 
959. 

102) Lee JM. Davis MM, Woolford SJ, Gurney JG. Waist circumference percentile thresholds for 
identifying adolescents with insulin resistance in clinical practice. Pediatric Diabetes. 2009; 10: 336- 
342. 

103) Hollingsworth JM, Davis MM, West BT, Wolf JS Jr, Hollenbeck BK. Trends in medical expulsive 
therapy use for urinary stone disease in U.S. emergency departments. Urology. 2009;74: 1206-1210. 

104) Davis MM, Butchart AT, Coleman MS, Singer DC, Wheeler JRC, Pok A, Freed GL. The expanding 
vaccine development pipeline, 1995-2008. Vaccine. 2010;28:1353-1356. 

105) Lancaster CA, Gold KJ, Flynn HA, Yoo H, Marcus SM, Davis MM. Risk factors for depressive 
symptoms during pregnancy: a systematic review. Amer Jour Obstet Gyn. 2010;5- 14. 

106) Schilling P, Campbell D, Englesbe M, Davis MM. A comparison of in-hospital mortality risk 
conferred by high hospital occupancy, differences in nurse staffing levels, weekend admission, and 
seasonal influenza. Medical Care. 2010;48:224-232. 

107) Freed GL, Clark SJ, Butchart AT, Singer DC, Davis MM. Parental vaccine safety concerns in 2009. 
Pediatrics. 2010;125:654-659. 

108) Macy ML, Kim CS, Sasson C, Lozon MM, Davis MM. Pediatric observation units in the United 
States: a systematic review. Jour Hosp Med. 2010;5:172-182. 

109) Okumura MJ, Kerr EA, Cabana MD, Davis MM, Demonner S, Heisler M. Physician views on 
barriers to primary care for young adults with childhood-onset chronic disease. Pediatrics. 
2010;125:e748-e754. 

110) Freed GL, Dunham KM, Clark SJ, Davis MM, on behalf of the Research Advisory Committee of the 
American Board of Pediatrics. Perspectives and preferences regarding physician selection and board 
certification among the general public. J Pediatr. 2010;156;841-845. 

111) Tarini BA, Goldenberg A, Singer D, Clark SJ, Butchart A, Davis MM. Not without my permission: 
parents’ willingness to permit use of newborn screening samples for research. Public Health 
Genomics. 2010;13:125-130. 

112) Lancaster CA, Flynn HA, Johnson TRB, Marcus SM, Davis MM. Peripartum length of stay for 
women with depressive symptoms during pregnancy. Jour Women ’s Health. 2010;19:3 1-37. 

113) Woolford SJ, Clark SJ, Gebremariam A, Davis MM, Freed GL. To cut or not to cut: physicians’ 
perspectives on referring adolescents for bariatric surgery. Obes Surg. 2010;20:937-942. 

1 14) Sussman J, Halasyamani LK, Davis MM. Hospitals during recession and recovery: vulnerable 
institutions and quality at risk. Jour Hosp Med. 2010;5:302-305. 

1 15) Odetola FO, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Comorbid illnesses among critically ill hospitalized 
children: impact on hospital resource use and mortality, 1997-2006. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2010; 
11:457-463. 

1 16) Woolford SJ, Clark SJ, Gebremariam A, Davis MM, Freed GL. Physicians’ perspectives on referring 
obese adolescents to pediatric multidisciplinary weight management programs. Clin Pediatr. 
2010;49:871-875. 

117) Macy ML, Stanley RM, Sasson C, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. High turnover stays for pediatric 
asthma in the United States: analysis of the 2006 Kids’ Inpatient Database. Med Care. 2010;48:827- 
833. 

118) Lee JM, Gebremariam A, Davis MM, Kim C. Trends in hospitalizations for diabetes over the life 
course. Jour Women’s Health. 2010;19:2033-2042. 

119) Patel MS, Davis MM, Lypson ML. Advancing medical education by teaching health policy. N Engl 
Jour Med. 2011;364:695-697. 


Davis CV 


22 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



120) Eisenberg D, Freed GL. Davis MM, Singer D, Prosser LA. Valuing health at different ages: evidence 
from a nationally representative survey in the US. Applied Health Economics & Health 

Policy. 2011;9:149-156. 

121) Yoon EY, Clark SJ, Singer DC, Butchart AT, Davis MM. Parental preferences for FDA-approved 
medications prescribed for their children. Clin Pediatr. 2011 ;50:208-2 14. 

122) Davis N, Davis MM, Freed GL, Clark SJ. Fathers’ depression related to positive and negative 
parenting behaviors with one-year-old children. Pediatrics. 2011;127:612-618. 

123) Freed GL, Clark SJ, Butchart AT, Singer DC, Davis MM. Sources and perceived credibility of 
vaccine safety information for parents. Pediatrics. 2011;127(suppl):S107-S112. 

124) Palladino CL, Flynn HA, Richardson C, Marcus SM, Johnson TRB, Davis MM. Lengthened pre- 
delivery stay and antepartum complications in women with depressive symptoms during pregnancy. 
Jour Women’s Health. 2011;20:953-962. 

125) Benneyworth BD, Shanley TS, Odetola F, Davis MM. Inpatient health care utilization for children 
dependent on long-term mechanical ventilation - United States, 2000-2006. Pediatrics. 

201 1;127:©1533 -e!54i. 

126) Macy ML, Davis MM, Clark SJ, Stanley R. Parental health literacy and asthma education delivery 
during a visit to a community-based pediatric emergency department: a pilot study. Pediatr Emerg 
Care. 2011;27:469-474. 

127) Palladino CL, Fedock GL, Forman JH, Davis MM, Henshaw E, Flynn HA. OB CARES - The 
obstetric clinic and resources study: providers’ perceptions of addressing perinatal depression — a 
qualitative study. Gen Hasp Psych. 2011;33:267-278. 

128) Zickafoose JS, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Medical home disparities between children 
with public and private insurance. Academic Peds. 2011;11:305-310. 

129) Davis MM, Walter JK. Equality in quality in the era of the Affordable Care Act. JAMA. 
2011:306:872-873. 

130) Hassan F, Davis MM, Chervin RD. No independent association between insufficient sleep and 
childhood obesity in the National Survey of Children’s Health. J Clin Sleep Med. 2011;7:153-157. 

131) Dempsey AF, Schaffer S, Singer D, Butchart A, Davis MM, Freed GL. Alternative vaccination 
schedule preferences among parents of young children. Pediatrics. 201 1;128:848-856. 

132) Davis MM, Butchart AT, Wheeler JRC, Coleman MS, Singer DC, Freed GL. Failure-to-success 
ratios, transition probabilities and phase lengths for prophylactic vaccines versus other 
pharmaceuticals in the development pipeline. Vaccine. 201 1;29: 94 14-94 16. 

133) Dayoub EJ, Davis MM. Relationship of therapeutic cancer vaccine development to population 
disease burden and five-year survival. Human Vaccines. 201 1;7: 1 124-1129. 

134) Odetola FO, Clark SJ, Lamarand KE, Davis MM, Garton HJ. Intracranial pressure monitoring in 
childhood meningitis with coma: a national survey of neurosurgeons in the United States. Pediatr 
Crit Care Med. 201 l;12:e350-356. 

135) Espinosa CM, Davis MM, Gilsdorf JR. Anaerobic osteomyelitis in children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 
2011;30:422-423. 

136) Zickafoose JS, Benneyworth B, Riebschleger MP, Espinosa CE, Davis MM. Hospitalizations for 
intussusception before and after re-introduction of rotavirus vaccine in the United States. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med. 20 12; 1 66:350-355. 

137) Myrvik MP, Campbell AD, Davis MM, Butcher JL. Impact of psychiatric diagnoses on hospital 
length of stay in children with sickle cell anemia. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012;58:239-243. 

138) Sun GH, Davis MM. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010: impact on 
otolaryngology practice and research. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2012 Jan 26. [Epub ahead of 
print] 

139) Abir M, Choi H, Cooke CR, Wang SC, Davis MM. Effect of a mass casualty incident: clinical 


Davis CV 


23 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



outcomes and hospital charges for casualty patients versus concurrent inpatients. Acad EmergMed 
2012;19:280-286. 

140) Zickafoose JS, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Medical home disparities for children by insurance type 
and state of residence. Matern Child Health Jour. 2012;16 Suppl 1:S 178-S 187. 

141) Patrick SW. Schumacher RE, Benneyworth BD, Krans EE, McAllister JM, Davis MM. Neonatal 
abstinence syndrome and associated health care expenditures. JAMA. 2012;307: 1934-1940. 

142) Danziger P, Davis MM. Mandatory influenza vaccination programs for health care personnel in 
NACHRJ-associated children’s hospitals vs. non-children’s hospitals. Human Vaccines 
Immunotherapeutics. 2012;8:731-735. 

143) Singer DC, Davis MM, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Underinsurance for recently recommended 
vaccines in private health plans. Jour Community Health. 20 12;37: 1 164-1167. 

144) Macy ML, Clark SJ, Freed GL, Butchart AT, Singer DC, Sasson C, Meurer WJ, Davis MM. 
Carpooling and booster seats: a national survey of parents. Pediatrics. 2012;129:290-298. 

145) Weinberg SH, Butchart AT, Davis MM. Size of clinical trials and introductory prices of prophylactic 
vaccine series. Human Vaccines Immunotherapeutics. 2012;8:1066-1070. 

146) Patrick SW, Choi H, Davis MM. Increase in federal match associated with significant gains in 
coverage for children through Medicaid and SCHIP. Health Affairs. 2012;3 1: 1796-1802. 

147) Gowda C, Carlos RC, Butchart AT, Singer DC, Davis MM, Clark SJ, Dempsey AF. CHIAS: a 
standardized measure of parental HPV immunization attitudes and beliefs and its associations with 
vaccine uptake. Sexual Transmit Dis. 2012:39:475-481. 

148) Sears ED, Davis MM, Chung KC. Relationship between timing of emergency procedures and limb 
amputation in patients with open tibia fracture in the United States, 2003 to 2009. Plast Reconst 
Surg. 2012;130:369-378. 

149) Patrick SW, Schumacher RE, Davis MM. Variation in lumbar punctures for early onset neonatal 
sepsis: a nationally representative serial cross-sectional analysis, 2003-2009. BMC Pediatrics. 
2012:12:134. DOI: 10.1186/1471-2431-12-134. 

150) Patel MS, Davis MM, Lypson ML. The VALUE framework: training residents to provide value- 
based care for their patients. Jour Gen Intern Med. 2012;27:1210-1214. 

151) Sears ED, Burke JF, Davis MM, Chung K. The influence of procedure delay on resource utilization: 
a national study of patients with open tibial fracture. Plast Reconst Surg. 2013;131:553-563. 

152) Davis MM, Clark SJ, Butchart AT, Singer DC, Shanley TP, Gipson DS. Public participation in, and 
awareness about, medical research opportunities in the era of clinical and translational research. Clin 
TranslSci. 2013;6:88-93. 

153) Jensen KM, Davis MM. Health care in adults with Down syndrome: a longitudinal cohort study. 

Jour Intell Disability Res. 2013;57:947-958. 

154) Woolford SJ, Clark SJ, Butchart A, Geiger JD, Davis MM, Fagerlin A. To pay or not to pay: public 
perception regarding insurance coverage of obesity treatment. Obesity. 2013;21:E709-E714. 

155) Jensen KM, Davis MM, Cooke CM. Fidelity of administrative data when researching Down 
syndrome. Medical Care. 2013 Jan 25. [epub ahead of print] 

156) Auger K, Kahn R, Davis MM, Beck A, Simmons J. Medical home quality and readmission risk for 
children hospitalized with asthma exacerbations. Pediatrics. 2013;131:64-70. 

157) Sun GH, Auger KA, Aliu O, Patrick SW, Demonner S, Davis MM. Posttonsillectomy hemorrhage in 
children with von Willebrand disease or hemophilia. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
2013;139:245-249. 

158) Abir M, Davis MM, Sankar P, Wong AC, Wang SC. Design of a model to predict surge capacity 
bottlenecks for bum mass casualties at a large academic medical center. Prehosp Disaster Med. 
2013;28:23-32. 

159) Jensen KM, Taylor LC, Davis MM. Primary care for adults with Down syndrome: adherence to 


Davis CV 


24 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



preventive healthcare recommendations. Jour Intell Disability Res. 2013;57:409-421. 

160) Pynnonen M, Davis MM. Extent of sinus surgery, 2000 to 2009: a population-based study. 
Laryngoscope. 20 1 3 ;[epub ahead of print] . 

161) Krans EE, Davis MM, Palladino CL. Disparate patterns of prenatal care utilization stratified by 
medical and psychosocial risk. Matern Child Health J. 2013;17:639-645. 

162) Aliu O, Davis MM, Demonner S, Chung KC. The influence of evidence in the surgical treatment of 
thumb basilar joint arthritis. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013;131:816-828. 

163) Goldenberg AJ, Dodson DS, Davis MM, Tarini BA. Parents’ interest in whole-genome sequencing 
of newborns. Genet Med. 2013;[epub ahead of print], 

164) Patrick SW, Schumacher RE, Davis MM. Methods of mortality risk adjustment in the NICU: a 20- 
yearreview. Pediatrics. 2013;131:S68-S74. 

165) DeCamp LR, Kieffer E, Zickafoose JS, DeMonner S, Valbuena F, Davis MM, Heisler M. The voices 
of limited English proficiency mothers on pediatric primary care: lessons for the medical home. 
Matern Child Health Jour. 2013;17:95-109. 

166) Patrick SW, Davis MM, Sedman AB, Meddings JA, Hieber S, Lee GM, Stillwell TL, Chenoweth 
CE, Espinosa CM, Schumacher RE. Accuracy of hospital administrative data in reporting central 
line-associated bloodstream infections in newborns. Pediatrics. 2013;131:S75-S80. 

167) Sun GH, Auger KA, Aliu O, Patrick SW, Demonner S, Davis MM. Variation in inpatient 
tonsillectomy costs within and between US hospitals attributable to postoperative complications. 

Med Care. 2013;51:1048-1054. 

168) Zickafoose JS, Davis MM. Medical home disparities are not created equal: differences in the 
medical home for children from different vulnerable groups. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 
2013;24:1331-1343. 

169) Walter JK, Benneyworth BD, Housey M, Davis MM. The factors associated with high-quality 
communication for critically ill children. Pediatrics. 2013;131:S90-S95. 

170) Krans EE, Davis MM, Schwarz EB. Psychosocial risk, prenatal counseling and maternal behavior: 
findings from PRAMS, 2004-2008. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2013;208:141.el-e7. 

171) Gaies MG, Jacobs JP, Cotts TB, Davis MM. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act: impact 
on care to patients with paediatric and congenital cardiac disease. Cardiol Young. 2013;10: 1-4. 

172) Walter JK, Burke JF, Davis MM. Research participation by low-income and race/ethnic minority 
groups: how payment may change the balance. Clin Trans Sci. 2013;6:363-371. 

173) Sun GH, Demonner S, Davis MM. Epidemiological and economic trends in inpatient and outpatient 
thyroidectomy in the United States, 1996-2006. Thyroid. 2013;23:727-733. 

174) Chang T, Choi H, Richardson CR, Davis MM. Implications of teen birth for overweight and obesity 
in adulthood. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2013;110:el-e7. 

175) Heisler M, Halasyamani L, Cowen ME, Davis MM, Resnicow K, Strawderman RL, Choi H, Mase R, 
Piette JD. Randomized controlled effectiveness trial of reciprocal peer support in heart failure. Circ: 
Heart Failure. 2013:6:246-253. 

176) Chang T, Davis MM. Potential adult Medicaid beneficiaries under the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act compared with current adult Medicaid beneficiaries. Ann Fam Med. 
2013;11:406-411. 

177) Haggins A, Patrick S, Demonner S, Davis MM. When coverage expands: children’s health insurance 
program as a natural experiment in use of health care services. Acad EmergMed. 2013;20: 1026- 
1032. 

178) Auger KA, Patrick SW, Davis MM. Infant hospitalizations for pertussis before and after Tdap 
recommendations for adolescents. Pediatrics. 2013;132:5:el 149-el 155. 

179) Cobb EM, Singer DC, Davis MM. Public interest in medical research participation: differences by 
volunteer status and study type. Clin Trans Sci. 2014;7:145-149. 


Davis CV 


25 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



180) Goldenberg AJ, Dodson DS, Davis MM, Tarini BA. Parents’ interest in whole-genome sequencing 
of newborns. Genet Medicine. 2014:16:78-84. 

181) Hanauer DA, Zheng K, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Public awareness, perception, and 
use of online physician rating sites. JAMA. 2014;311:734-735. 

182) Mueller EL, Park ER, Davis MM. What the Affordable Care Act means for survivors of pediatric 
cancer. Jour Clin Oncol. 2014;32:615-617. 

183) Moniz MH, Chang T, Davis MM. Attitudes about mandated coverage of birth control medication 
and other health benefits in a US national sample. JAMA. 20 14;3 1 1 :2539-254 1 . 

184) Hashikawa AN, Brousseau DC, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Emergency department and 
urgent care for children excluded from child care. Pediatrics. 2014; 134(l):el20-7. 

185) Auger KA, Kenyon CC, Feudtner C, Davis MM. Pediatric hospital discharge interventions to reduce 
subsequent utilization: a systematic review. J Hosp Med. 2014;9:251-260. 

186) Sekhar DL, Clark SJ, Davis MM, Singer DC, Paul IM. Parental perspectives on adolescent hearing 
loss risk and prevention. JAMA Otolaryngol HeadNeck Surg. 2014;140:22-28. 

187) Krans EE, Davis MM. Strong Start for mothers and newborns: implications for prenatal care 
delivery. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2014; 511-515. 

188) Kircher SM, Johansen ME, Nimeiri HS, Richardson CR, Davis MM. Impact of Medicare Part D on 
out-of-pocket drug costs and medical use for patients with cancer. Cancer. 2014;120:3378-3384. 

189) Auger KA, Kahn RS, Davis MM, Simmons JM. Pediatric asthma readmission: asthma knowledge is 
not enough? J Pediatr. 2014;166:101-108. 

190) Clark SA, Shoulders EN, Davis MM. Infant pertussis prevention information on Web sites of 
Michigan birthing hospitals. Am Jour Inf Cntrl. 2014;42:1241-1243. 

191) Sandberg KC, Davis MM, Gebremariam A, Adler J. Increasing hospitalizations in inflammatory 
bowel disease among children in the United States, 1988-2011. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2014;20: 1754- 
1760. 

192) Hanauer DA, Zheng K, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Parental awareness and use of 
online physician rating sites. Pediatrics. 2014;134:e966-975. 

193) Patrick SW, Kaplan HC, Passarella M, Davis MM, Lorch SA. Variation in treatment of neonatal 
abstinence syndrome in US children’s hospitals. J Perinatol. 2014;34:867-872. 

194) Sun GH, MacEachern MP, Perla RJ, Gaines JM, Davis MM, et al. Health care quality improvement 
publication trends. Am Jour Med Qual. 2014;29:403-407. 

195) Barbara RP, Odetola FO, Kidwell KM, Paden ML, Bartlett RH, Davis MM*, Annich GM* (*=joint 
senior authorship). Association of hospital-level volume of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
cases and mortality: analysis of the extracorporeal life support organization registry. Am JRespir 
Crit Care Med. 2015;191:894-901. 

196) Jensen KM, Sevick CJ, Seewald LAS, Halbower AC, Davis MM, McCabe ERB, et al. Greater risk 
of hospitalization in children with Down syndrome and OSA at higher elevation. Chest. 
2015;147:1344-1351. 

197) Patrick SW, Davis MM, Lehman CU, Cooper WO. Increasing incidence and geographic distribution 
of neonatal abstinence syndrome: United States 2009 to 2012. J Perinatol. Published online first 30 
Apr 2015; doi: 10. 1038/jp.2015.36. 

198) Krans EE, Moloci NM, Housey MT, Davis MM. Impact of psychosocial risk factors on prenatal care 
delivery: a national provider survey. Matern Child Health J. 2014;18:2362-2370 

199) Pynonnen MA, Lynn S, Kern HE, Novis SJ, Akkina SR, Keshavarzi NR, Davis MM. Diagnosis and 
treatment of acute sinusitis in the primary care setting: a retrospective cohort. Laryngoscope. 2015; 
published online first 22 May 2015;doi:10.1002/lary.25363. 

200) Auger KA, Jerardi KE, Simmons JE, Davis MM, O’Toole JK, Sucharew HJ. It’s complicated: 
overcoming statistical challenges of group learning in medical education research. J Grad Med Ed. 


Davis CV 


26 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



2015;7:326-330. 

201) Auger KA, Davis MM. Pediatric weekend admission and increased unplanned readmission rates. J 
HospMed. Published online first 18 Sep 2015, DOI: 10.1002/jhm.2426. 

Editorials and Commentaries (non-peer-reviewed) 

1) Davis MM, Lantos JD. Ethical considerations in the public policy laboratory. JAMA. 2000;284:85- 
87. 

2) Davis MM, Kemper AR. Valuing childhood vaccines. JPediatr. 2003;143:283-284. 

3) Davis MM. Race-based immunization recommendations and the potential to reduce racial 
disparities. JAMA. 2004;291:2253-2255. 

4) Davis MM, Szilagyi PG. Can quality improvement reach into pockets of need for childhood 
immunizations? AmbulPedia.tr 2004;4:224-225. 

5) Davis MM. Planning the next wave of SCHIP research. Pediatrics. 2005;115:492-494. 

6) Davis MM. Varicella vaccine, cost-effectiveness analyses, and vaccination policy. JAMA. 
2005;294:845-846. 

7) Van Cleave J, Kemper AR, Davis MM. Interpreting negative results from an underpowered clinical 
trial: warts and all. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2006;160:1126-1129. 

8) Garfield CF, Clark-Kauffman E, Davis MM. Fatherhood as a component of men’s health. JAMA. 
2006;296:2365-2368. 

9) Davis MM. Cardiac rehabilitation as a site for influenza vaccination? J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 
2007;27:210-211. 

10) Davis MM. Reasons and remedies for underinsurance for childhood and adolescent vaccines. 
JAMA. 2007;298:680-682. 

11) Davis MM, Brosco JP. Being specific about being special: definitions of childhood chronic 
conditions and children with special health care needs. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2007;161: 1003- 
1005. 

12) Davis MM. Challenges in cost-effectiveness analyses of hospital interventions to improve quality. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2008;29:395-397. 

13) Davis MM, Shah S. Necessary innovations in immunization delivery. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2009;163:483-485. 

14) Shah S, Davis MM. Old disease, innovative response: accelerating infant vaccination during a 
community pertussis outbreak. JAMA. 2009;301:2260-2261. 

15) Rivara FP, Davis MM. Archives journal club just a click away. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2009;163:957. 

16) Davis MM. Medicaid, underinsurance, and the dawn of an era for children’s coverage. Pediatrics. 
2010;125:817-819. 

17) Davis MM. Price as a double-edged sword in the golden era of vaccines. Human Vaccines. 
2010;6:689-693. 

18) Davis MM. The conundrum of combination vaccines. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2010;164: 1171- 
1172. 

19) Chopra V, Davis MM. In search of equipoise. JAMA. 2011;305:1234-1235. 

20) Davis MM, Dayoub E. A strategic approach to therapeutic cancer vaccines in the 21 st century. 
JAMA. 2011;305:2343-2344. 

21) Davis MM, CP Gross, CM Clancy. Building a bridge to somewhere better: linking health care 
research and health policy. Health Services Res. 2012:47:329-336. 

22) Krans EE, Davis MM. Preventing Low Birthweight: 25 years, prenatal risk, and the failure to 
reinvent prenatal care. AmerJour Obstet Gynecol. 2012;206:398-403. 


Davis CV 


27 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



23) Christakis DA, Joffe A, Keren R, Davis MM, Shah SS, Rivara FP. Introducing JAMA Pediatrics. 
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2012;166:663. 

24) Davis MM, Riebschleger MP. The next century of children’s health care: addressing disparities, 
workforce deficiencies, and undercoordinated services. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 20 1 1 ; 1 65 : 1 067 - 
1068. 

25) Vickery KD, Sauser K, Davis MM. Policy responses to demand for health care access: from the 
individual to the population. JAMA. 2013;309:665-666. 

26) Patrick SW, Davis MM. Reformulating the federal match as a key to the sustainability of Medicaid. 
JAMA Pediatr. 2013;167:218-220. 

27) Davis MM. Stunting the growth of child health research: a need to reframe “children are not small 
adults.” JAMA Pediatr. 2013;167:598-599. 

Non-Peer-Reviewed Publications and Published Letters 

1) Davis MM. Music as a means of public health education among Guatemalan schoolchildren. Honors 
thesis. Harvard Medical School, Boston, 1994. 

2) Davis, MM. Health through song: Outreach workers in Benin and Guatemala use lyrics to promote 
health. Harv Med Alumni Bull. 1999;73:36-41. 

3) Davis MM. Health behaviors (helping patients change). In: Pocket Primary Care. LK Halasyamani, 
BP Lucas, eds. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001. pp.4-5. 

4) Davis MM. Effects and ethics of sanctions on childhood immunization rates. JAMA. 

2000;284:2057. [letter] 

5) Davis MM, Bruckman D, Cabana MD, Clark SJ, Dombkowski KJ, Kemper AR, Rushton JL, Freed 
GL. Constructive use of race and ethnicity variables. Arch Pediatr Adol Med. 2001;155:973. [letter] 

6) Davis MM, Kemper AR. Valuing vaccines. J Pediatr. 2004; 145:568. [letter] 

7) Davis MM. Effect of pneumococcal vaccination on quality of life in children with recurrent acute 
otitis media: a randomized, controlled trial. J Pediatr. 2005;147: 124-125. [comment] 

8) Davis MM. Cost-effectiveness of conjugate meningococcal vaccination strategies in the United 
States. J Pediatr. 2005;147:407-408. [comment] 

9) Davis MM. Acellular pertussis vaccine is protective for adolescents and adults. J Pediatr. 
2006;148:417. [comment] 

10) Davis MM, Patel MS, Halasyamani LK. Medicare prescription drug plan costs and affordability. J 
Gen Intern Med. 2007 ;available at: 

http://www.soringerlink.com/conteot/a8v3r3712v7732vl/fulltextpdf . 

1 1) Patrick SW, Schumacher RE, Davis MM. Neonatal abstinence syndrome — reply. JAMA. 
2012;308:762-764. [letter] 

Research and Policy Briefs (non-peer reviewed) 

1) Davis MM, Hibbard JH, Milstein A. Consumer tolerance for inaccuracy in physician performance 
ratings: one size fits none. Center for Studying Health System Change, Washington, DC: Issue Brief 
No. 110, March 2007. Available at: hf^:/7www.hschao.ge.org/CQNTENT/92i/. 

2) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. More children expected to seek care at retail clinics. C.S. Mott 
Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 1, Issue 1, April 
2007. Available at: http://www.rned. umich.edu/mott''research/chearreiailpoll.htnil 

3) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Smoking, drugs, and obesity top public’s list of health problems 
for children. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 1, Issue 2, May 2007. Available at: 


Davis CV 


28 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



http : //www . med. . uroich . edu/motbtesearch/chearheal theoncempol 1. him! 

4) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Majority of parents not in favor of state HPV vaccine mandates. 
C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 1, 
Issue 3, May 2007. Available at: http://vy ww.med.iimich.edu/mott/research/chearhpvvaccme.html 

5) Davis MM, Tarini B, Singer DC, Clark SJ. DNA biobanks and genetic testing - for whom, and 
when? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 1, Issue 4, June 2007. Available at: 

htt p ://www.med.umlch.edu/mott/fssearch/chea rgs neti.ctssti ng .htol 

6) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Covering families: how generous should SCHIP be? C.S. Mott 
Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 1, Issue 5, 
August 2007. Available at: http://www.rned. uTmch.edu/molthesearch/chearschip.htrnl 

7) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Flu vaccination among children may reach all-time high this year. 
C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 2, 
Issue 1, October 2007. Available at: htty://wwwrm.ed.inn;ch..edn/mott/research/chearfin.pori.'htnrl 

8) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Do high gas prices lead to less health care for kids? C.S. Mott 
Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 2, Issue 2, 
November 2007. Available at: http://www.med.rimich,eda/tnott/Tesearch/cheargasc.ard.htm1 

9) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Parental concerns about childhood obesity: time for a reality 
check? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 2, Issue 3, December 2007. Available at: 
http://wvm.med.iumch.edu/mott/rcsearch/chearbmi.html . 

10) Davis MM, Dempsey A, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Adolescent check-ups: parents want diet, drugs, and 
sex discussed. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 2, Issue 4, January 2008. Available at: 
http://wmv.med.umioh.edu/mott/research/chearcheckup.htiiti. 

1 1) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Adults and kids less protected than anticipated against the flu. 

C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 3, 
Issue 1, January 2008. Available at: h(to://mvw.med.timich.edu/mott/research/chearfluupdate.html . 

12) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Nearly 70 million Americans using discount generic 
prescription drug programs. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 3, Issue 2, February? 2008. Available at: 

http : // w w w .med. umich. edu/mott/rese arcli/cheai'd.grxprogram. html . 

13) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Child health threats: are consumer alerts enough? C.S. 
Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 3, Issue 3, 
March 2008. Available at: http://www.med.amich.edu/to.ott/researeh/chsarconsumeralerts.html. 

14) Davis MM, Yoon EY, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Ask the doctor: Is my child’s medicine 
FDA-approved? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 3, Issue 4, April 2008. Available at: 
http://www.med.umich.edu/mott/research/chearFDAapptovedm.edicines.html . 

15) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Children in research: many parents willing if risk of 
harm is small. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 3, Issue 5, May 2008. Available at: 
http://www.msd.utmch.edu/mott/research/cheaiChildrenIpResearch.html . 

16) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Summer safety for ‘tweens’ home alone. C.S. Mott 
Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 4, Issue 1, June 
2008. Available at: http : //www . med . umich. edu/mott/rese atxh/ chear S ururn er S afety .html . 

17) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Obesity tops list of biggest health problems for kids in 
2008. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 


Davis CV 


29 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Vol 4, Issue 2, July 2008. Available at: http://l3.edth.med. umich.eduA?ody.c.fm?id^4 15. 

18) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Retail clinics: an emerging source of health care for 
children. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 4, Issue 3, August 2008. Available at: httn://healfh.med.umich.edu/body.cfm?kty480 . 

19) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Bullying worries parents of overweight and obese 
children. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 4, Issue 4, September 2008. Available at: http://lrealth.med.rimich.edn/home npch.cfm?id~325. 

20) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Who do voters prefer for children’s health issues? 

C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 5, 
Issue 1, October 2008. Available at: http://health.med.im:dc3:redmbody.cfm?id^507 . 

21) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Knowledge key to support for embryonic stem cell 
research. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 5, Issue 2, October 2008. Available at: ht ip ://h.ealth.Tned.umlch.edu/bod.y.cfm?id~514. 

22) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Parents of high school athletes speak out on 
performance-enhancing drugs. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 5, Issue 3, November 2008. Available at: 
http://health..rned.umich..edu/ J bodv.cfm?id ::: 521 . 

23) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Mental health services for children and adolescents: 
missed opportunities in primary care & barriers to specialty care. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital 
National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 5, Issue 4, December 2008. 
Available at: http ://healtIx.med.nnuch. edu/body xfm?id-529 . 

24) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. For 12 million uninsured children, high barriers to 
dental care. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 5, Issue 5, February 2009. Available at: 
http://hea3th.med.umi.ch.edti/bo dy .cftn?id=538. 

25) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Private insurance in peril: millions of parents worried 
about costs, coverage. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 
of Michigan. Vol 6, Issue 1, March 2009. Available at: 

http: //health. med.umich. edu/body. cfm.?ld^547. 

26) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Sweet danger - public links alcopops, underage 
drinking. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 6, Issue 2, April 2009. Available at: 

http : //he al th. med, umich. edu/workfiles/n pch/04Q609repor t. pdf 

27) O’Malley AS, Tynan A, Cohen G, Kemper NM, Davis MM. Coordination of care by primary care 
practices: strategies, lessons and implications. Center for Studying Health System Change, Research 
Brief No. 12. Available at: http://www.hscha nge .Org / CQNTBNT/l 058/1 058.pdf. 

28) Davis MM, Leo H, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Are schools doing enough for food-allergic 
kids? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 

Vol 6, Issue 3, May 2009. Available at: http ://health.med. umich . edu/home- npch . cfi:n.?id ::: 325 . 

29) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Bicycle helmet laws effective but not yet the norm. 

C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 6, 
Issue 4, June 2009. Available at: htt p ://hea1th.med.umich.edu/hom e np ch.efm?id=325. 

30) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. For kids, hard economic times mean more stress, fewer 
doctor visits. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 7, Issue 1, July 2009. Available at: http://hea1ty.med.unrich.edu/bodv. cfm?id :::: 586 . 

3 1) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Public concern rising about childhood obesity. C.S. 
Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 7, Issue 2, 
August 2009. Available at: http :/7www . med . umich. edu/m otynpcb; reports/publ. i cconccm. him . 


Davis CV 


30 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



32) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Healthy food choices: can schools improve their 
grades? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 7, Issue 3, August 2009. Available at: 

http://www.med. i.mrich.edu/mottmpcM'eports/'foodchoice.htm . 

33) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Parents pan school performance on bullying 
prevention. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 7, Issue 4, September 2009. Available at: 

http : //www . med , umich . sdu/mott/npctyreports/safeschool .htm.. 

34) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Parents may underestimate the risks of H1N1 flu for 
their children. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 8, Issue 1, September 2009. Available at: 
http://www.med.umich.edrr/moa/npch/ rep orts/hfBl.htin. 

35) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Public to health care workers: get your H1N1 vaccine. 
C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 8, 
Issue 2, October 2009. Available at: http://www.med.amich.sdu/mott/npch/reports/flushot.httn . 

36) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Internet predators, privacy and porn concern parents. 
C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 8, 
Issue 3, November 2009. Available at: 

.http:/7www.m.sd.unric]r.edu./m.otfc' hp ch/r ep oite ; intemetsafe t\ 7 .hto. 

37) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. In age of ‘sexting’, parents weigh options to block 
inappropriate content. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 
of Michigan. Vol 8, Issue 4, December 2009. Available at: 

http://www.med. urnich.edu/mott/rmch/reports/cellphone.hto. . 

38) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Health care provider recommendations key to H1N1 
vaccination. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 9, Issue 1, January 2010. Available at: 
http://wvvw.med.umich.edu/mott/npcli/reports/lilhivac.htm . 

39) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Is the vaccine worse than the disease? C.S. Mott 
Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 9, Issue 2, 
February 2010. Available at: http://wwvv.med.umich.edu/jnott7npch/reports/hinlim.munization.htm. 

40) Davis MM, Macy ML, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark S J. Many parents not using booster seats, 
unaware of state laws for kids 4-8 years old. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on 
Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 9, Issue 3, March 2010. Available at: 
http:/7ww vv.med.umich.edu/mott/npch/reports/hoosterseathtm . 

41) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Speak or spank? More parents choose reasoning than 
physical discipline. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 9, Issue 4, April 2010. Available at: 
http://www.med.umich.edu/mott/apch/reportei/spank.htoi . 

42) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. “ePediatrics”: Parents want more communication with 
their kids’ doctors. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 9, Issue 5, May 2010. Available at: 
htt p ://www.med.tunich.edu/mott fep ch/xs p orts/comiiiunicafion.htPi. 

43) Clark SJ, Singer DC, Butchart A, Davis MM. Concussions in school sports: parents ill-prepared for 
role in reducing kids’ risks. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 10, Issue 1, June 2010. Available at: 
http://V/vvvv\m.gd.umich.edxu'm.ott/n p ch/re p orts/c-oncusslons..h.bn.. 

44) Tarini BA, Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Most parents interested in at-home genetic 
testing for their kids. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 


Davis CV 


31 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 





Michigan. Vol 10, Issue 2, July 2010. Available at: 
http ://www.m.ed.iimich.ediy'mott' hp ch/rs p orte. /ge nstic..htiu. 

45) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Obesity, stress, teen pregnancy top children’s health 
problems and getting worse. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 10, Issue 3, August 2010. Available at: 
htty:/Avww.med.umich.edu/mot.bh.pch/re p orl.s/t.opten.htm.. 

46) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. For e-cigarettes, public supports health warnings and 
ban on sales to minors. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 
of Michigan. Vol 10, Issue 4, September 2010. Available at: 
http://www.med.umich.edu/motf/npcli/reports/ecigaretts.htm . 

47) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Parent views on medical research — safety of vaccines 
and medicines top priorities. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 11, Issue 1, October 2010. Available at: 

http : //www.msd . nmich.edu/mott/ np ch/re p orts/medica1-research .him . 

48) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Gun shy? 14 million parents have never talked gun 
safety with their kids. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 
of Michigan. Vol 1 1, Issue 2, November 2010. Available at: 

http : //www . med . uroich . edu/mott/ np ch/r ep orts / g un s hy .htm. 

49) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Strong public support for innovative programs to 
prevent teen pregnancy. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 

University of Michigan. Vol 1 1, Issue 3, January 2011. Available at: 
http://www.gied.umich.edu/giotf/npch/reports/pregnaricv.htm . 

50) Davis MM, Lewis TC, Hershenson M, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Tobacco: a smoking gun 
for kids’ asthma attacks. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 1 1, Issue 4, January' 2011. Available at: 

http : //www .med . imuch.edu/mott/npch/reporte/smoking . htm . 

5 1) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Despite warnings, parents continue to use cough and 
cold medicines for young kids. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 12, Issue 1, February 2011. Available at: 
http://www.med.umich.edu/mott/n p ch/r ep orts/coldTned.htax. 

52) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Parents wants explanations, not scare tactics, from the 
media about children’s health. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 12, Issue 2, March 2011. Available at: 
http://www.med.iunich.edu/moUAtpch/Teports/explanaaon.hta . 

53) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Gym gone but not forgotten? Parents want more 
physical activity at school for kids. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 12, Issue 3, April 2011. Available at: 
http://www.med.iunich.edu/mott/gpch/reporls/gym.htax . 

54) Davis MM, Woolford SJ, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Bariatric surgery for teens: how young is 
too young? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 12, Issue 4, May 2011. Available at: 

http : //www . med . umich . edu/mott /npch/reports/bariafaic. htm . 

55) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Few parents enforce shower-before-pool rules that 
prevent illness from water parks. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 13, Issue 1, June 2011. Available at: 
http://\¥vvw.m.ed.umich.edxg'motf/n p ch/re p orts/watersafety.htm. 

56) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Most parents unaware of research opportunities for 
their children. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 


Davis CV 


32 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Michigan. Vol 13, Issue 2, July 2011. Available at: 
hap ://www.med.uniich.edii/mott^ ap oh/re p orte/researcho pp .htm, 

57) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. Drug abuse now equals childhood 
obesity as top health concern for kids. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 13, Issue 3, August 2011. Available at: 

http : // www . med . uroich . edu/mot.t/npch. / re p orts/to p ien20 1 1 . him . 

58) Davis MM, Biermann B, Marcus S, Hua L, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. Parents 
say, “Other teens drink and use marijuana, but my kids don’t.” C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital 
National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 13, Issue 4, September 2011. 
Available at: htto://www.med.itmich.edi?/motfc/npch/feports/'ssubstanceuse.htm . 

59) Macy ML, Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. Parents turning car seats to 
face forward too early. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 
of Michigan. Vol 13, Issue 5, September 2011. Available at: 
http://wvyw.msd.umich.edu/mott fep ch/re p orts/carseats.htni. 

60) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark S J. Many young children off to a poor 
start with dental health. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 
of Michigan. Vol 13, Issue 6, October 2011. Available at: 

http : //www . med . uroich . edu/motV np ch/r ep orts/den talhealtfa.h im . 

61) Davis MM, Mohr B, Markman L, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. Many infants at 
risk in unsafe sleep settings. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 13, Issue 7, November 2011. Available at http://motinpch.org/reports- 
surveys/rnanv-infaEvls-risk-unsafe-sleep-setiings . 

62) Clark S J, Sekhar DL, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Davis MM. Silent risk: most parents 
and teens not talking about noise-induced hearing loss. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll 
on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 14, Issue 1, December 2011. Available at: 

http://mottnpch.org/reports-sfflvevs/kilerit~risk-most-parents-and-teens~not-taikmg-about-noise- 
indue ed-hearing-ioss . 

63) Davis MM, Rosen DS, Christner J, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. School obesity 
programs may promote worrisome eating behaviors and physical activity. C.S. Mott Children’s 
Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 14, Issue 2, January 2012. 
Available at: ht tp ://mott np ch.o rp,7 're p orte-sun''e v s/sch.ool-obesit v - p r ogr am.s-m ay - p rom.ots-worrisom.e- 
eating-behavior s-and-phvsical-actmW - 

64) Clark S J, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Davis MM. Too much of a good thing? Kids in 
low-income families drink more juice than recommended. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National 
Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 14, Issue 3, February 2012. Available at: 

ht.tp:/7nrot.tnpch.org/reports-su.rve v s/t.oo-miich-g o od-t.hiuR - kids-1ow-incoms-famili&s-drink-mors- 

iuic-s-recom.men.ded. 

65) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. For youth sexting: public supports 
education, not criminal charges. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 15, Issue 1, March 2012. Available at: 

ht^>://www.mottnpch.org/reports-s«r\ r ey s/youth.-sexting-public-supports-education-not-criminal- 

charees. 

66) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. Easy-access medicines a poisoning risk 
for kids at home. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 15, Issue 2, April 2012. Available at: http://vvw^^^mottIipch.org/renorts-survevs/'easY- 
access-medicines-poisoning-risk-kids-home. 

67) Clark S J, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Davis MM. Pay-to-play sports keeping low-income 
kids out of the game. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 


Davis CV 


33 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



of Michigan. Vol 15, Issue 3, May 2012. Available at: h ttp ://www.mott np ch.o rg /r ep orts- 
su r\?ev s/ p a v - p ia v -s p orts-kes p mg - lower-incoms-kids-out -s?; am.s. 

68) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark S J. Public wants Presidential candidates to 
address childhood obesity, bullying. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 16, Issue 1, June 2012. Available at: 
http://www.mottppch.org/reports-survey's /p ubllc-wants-presidential-candidates-address-childhood- 
obesity -bull y ing. 

69) Clark S J, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Davis MM. Public reluctant to support teen HPV 
vaccination without parental consent. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 16, Issue 2, July 2012. Available at: 

http://www-Enottnpch.org/reports-sarvevs/public-reluctent-support-teen-hpv-vaccination-without- 
parental -consent 

70) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. Top 10 child health concerns: exercixe, 
obesity, smoking lead list. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 16, Issue 3, August 2012. Available at: 

http://www.mottnpch.org/rer>orts-survevs/tor>-10-chiM-health-concerns-exercise-obesitv-smoking- 

lead-list . 

71) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. Bullying: when should schools take 
action? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 16, Issue 4, September 2012. Available at: ha p ://www,mottHpob..org/reports-survevs/builying- 
whsn-shcmld-schools-take-actiQn . 

72) Davis MM, Hashikawa A, Singer DC, Butchart AT, Kauffman AD, Clark S J. Sick kids, struggling 
parents. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 16, Issue 5, October 2012. Available at: htt p ://ww\v.mot tap ch.org / re p orts-surveys/sick-kids- 
st mgglmR-p arents. 

73) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Public supports expanded Internet 
safety requirements to protect kids. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 17, Issue 1, November 2012. Available at: 

http://%vww.m.otto.pch.org/reports-surv ey s/ p ublic-su pp orts-expanded-iuterriet-safety-requirem.ents- 

protect-kids . 

74) Davis MM, Lesperance M, Handelsman J, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. 
Parents loud and clear: test tweens and teens for hearing loss, too. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital 
National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 17, Issue 2, December 2012. 
Available at: http://mottapch.Org/renorts-sui-veys/r) arents-loud-and-cleai'-test-teens-and-tweens- 
heari ng- loss-too. 

75) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Parents numb to misuse of 
narcotic pain medicines by youth? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 17, Issue 3, January 2013. Available at: http:/7mottnp&h.org/re.ports- 
survevs/parents-uumb-misuse-narcotic-pain-medicines-vouth . 

76) Davis MM, Udow-Phillips M, Riba M, Young D, Roy an R. Primary care capacity and health reform: 
is Michigan ready? January 2013. Center for Healthcare Research and Transformation. Ann Arbor, 
MI. Available at: htt p ://www.chxt. o rg/pu bllc -p o'iic y/p oiic v -brlefs/ p riman ' -care-ca p aclt v -and-h.ealth- 
reform-is-michigan-re-ady/ . 

77) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. How to select a child’s doctor? 
Parents prefer grapevine to online. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 17, Issue 4, February 2013. Available at: ht tp ://mottnpch.org/repotts- 
survcys/how-se1ect-child%E2%80%99s-doctor-parents-prefer-grapevine-online. 

78) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Just what the doctor ordered? Not 


Davis CV 


34 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



for many parents. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 18, Issue 1, March 2013. Available at: ht tp :/7mott ap ch.o rg/ re p orts-survc v s/j n gt- 
what-doctor-ordcred-not-man v-n arente. 

79) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Parents ignore warning labels, 
give cough and cold meds to young kids. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 18, Issue 2, April 2013. Available at: 

http://mottnpch.org/reports-surve v s /p axents-ig n ore-wami ng- labe1s-give-cough-cold-ineds-vom3.g- 

klds. 

80) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. One in ten teens using “study 
drugs,” but are parents paying attention? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 18, Issue 3, May 2013. Available at: 

http://mottnpch.org/reports-stirve v s/one-t6n-teens-usi ng -%E2%80%9Cstodv-dmg8%E2%80%9D-are- 
parents- p a y in .g- at.ten u on . 

81) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Protecting newborns from 
whooping cough. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 18, Issue 4, June 2013. Available at: http://mottnnch.org/rer)orts-survevs/'protecting- 
newboms-whooping-cough . 

82) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Broad public support for banning 
smoking in vehicles with kids present. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 19, Issue 1, July 2013. Available at: 

http://mottrmch.org/reports-survews/broad~pnbhe~sapport~battnmg-smoking-vshicjes~kids-j3resenl . 

83) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Top child health concerns: 
obesity, drug abuse, and smoking. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 19, Issue 2, August 2013. Available at: htt p ://mottn p ch.o rg /re p orts- 
surv'evs/t op -chlld-healtlr-concems-obesl ty -dnig - abuse-aBd-smoki ng . 

84) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Top public priorities for 
children’s health research: cancer, diabetes, birth defects. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National 
Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 19, Issue 3, September 2013. Available at: 
ht^?://mottnpch.org/reports-surve y s/to p - p ublic- p riorities-children.%E2%80%99s-health-research- 
eancer-diabetes-blrth-defects. 

85) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Email consultation: co-pay or no- 
pay? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 
19, Issue 4, October 2013. Available at: http://mottapch.org/reports-surveys/email-consultaiion-co- 
pay-or-no-pay . 

86) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Medical research needs kids, but 
parents not aware of opportunities. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 19, Issue 5, November 2013. Available at: ht tp ://mott np ch. or g.reports- 
surveys/medical-rcsearch-needs-kids-pareiits-not-aware-opportumiies . 

87) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Adults worry e-cigarettes will 
encourage kids to start smoking tobacco. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 20, Issue 1, December 2013. Available at: 
htt p ://mottn p ch..org / r ep orts-sun 7 e v s/adxilfs-w j orr y -e-c ig: arettss-will-encourag e -kids-start.-smo.ki ns: - 
tobacco . 

88) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Seeing specialists: Roles of 
parents and providers unclear. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 20, Issue 2, January 2014. Available at: ht tp ://mottn p ch.org / r ep oris- 
surveys/seeing-specialists-roies -p arents-providers-unclear. 

89) Davis MM, Moniz MH, O’Connell LK, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. 


Davis CV 


35 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



“Breast is best” but uninsured parents take breastfeeding classes less often. C.S. Mott Children’s 
Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 20, Issue 3, February 2014. 
Available at: http:/.'teottapch.orR/reports-sun'Cvs/%B2%80%9Cbreast-be5t%B2%80%9D-unin.snred- 
parents-take-breastfeedmg-dasses-less-ofien . 

90) Clark SJ, Greenhawt M, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Nut-free lunch? 
Parents speak out. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 20, Issue 4, March 2014. Available at: h t ip : //motfopch. or g/reports-survey s/'n ut-free - 
lunch -p arents- sp eak-out 

91) Davis MM, Inniss AK, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Screening out screen 
time: Parents limit media use for young children. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on 
Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 21, Issue 1, April 2014. Available at: 

h.ttp:/7mottnpch.org/report.s-survev&''screening-out-screen-time-parents-limit-media-use-voun.g- 

chlldren. 

92) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Fighting childhood obesity: Are 
schools passing or failing? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 21, Issue 2, May 2014. Available at: http://motlnpch.org/reports- 
survevs/figfating-childhood-obesits'-are-schools-passijag-or-failing . 

93) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Sports physicals: convenient 
versus comprehensive? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 
of Michigan. Vol 21, Issue 3, June 2014. Available at: ht tp : //moto oc h . o rg/ tc p o its -surve y s/ sp orts - 
physicals-convenient-versus-comprehensive . 

94) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. The circumcision decision: 

Parents want info, not directives, from docs. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on 
Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 21, Issue 4, July 2014. Available at: 
http://mottnpch.orR/reports-suivevs/circumclslon-d.eclsion-parents-want.-mfo-not-direct.ives-docs. 

95) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. School violence, gun-related 
injuries in top 10 child health concerns in U.S. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on 
Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 22, Issue 1, August 2014. Available at: 
http://motopch.org/reports-sttrvevs/school-violence-gun-r6lat6d-inittri68-top-1.0-child-health- 
concents-us . 

96) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Head smart? Parents get 
confidence boost from concussion education. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on 
Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 22, Issue 2, September 2014. Available at: 
http://mottnpch.org/reports-survey s/head-smart-parents-get-confidence-boost-concussion-education . 

97) Davis MM, Woolford SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Nutrition facts: how 
moms and dads view labels differently. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 22, Issue 3, October 2014. Available at: 
http://motopch.org/reporis-surve vs/nnP'ition-facts-how-moms-and-dads-view-labds-differently . 

98) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Matos-Moreno A, Davis MM. Parents support 
daycare policies to get kids up-to-date on vaccines. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on 
Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 22, Issue 4, November 2014. Available at: 
http://mottnpch.org/reports-survevs/parents-s upp ort-d ay care-policies-get-kids-date-vacclnes. 

100) Davis MM, Fredericks E, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Matos-Moreno A, Clark SJ. 
Can their 18-year-olds make a doctor’s appointment? Half of parents say no. C.S. Mott Children’s 
Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 22, Issue 5, December 
2014. Available at: http://inotto p ch.o rg/ r epo rts-surveys/can-their-18-vear-olds-make- 
doctOT%E2%80%99s~ app ointment-half -p arents-s ay -no. 

101) Davis MM, for the Michigan Department of Community Health. Recommendations for addressing 


Davis CV 


36 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



the needs of high utilizer / super utilizer patients in Michigan. Submitted to the Michigan Legislature, 
December 2014. 

102) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Matos-Moreno A, Davis MM. Pay-to-play 
sports keeping some kids on the sidelines. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 22, Issue 6, January 2015. Available at: 
http://mottnpch.org/reports-survev& / pa v - p Iav-sports-ke epmg -8ome-kids-sidelm.es. 

103) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Clark SJ. Parents conflicted about later 
school start times for teens. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 23, Issue 1, February 2015. Available at: http://mottnpch.org/reports- 
sun.'eys/parents-conflicted-abont-lat&r-school-start-iimes-teens . 

104) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Davis MM. Parents on social media: likes 
and dislikes of sharenting. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 23, Issue 2, March 2015. Available at: htt p : / /mott np ch . o r g/ reports- 
surveys/parents-soeial-media-likes-and-dislikes-sharenti ng' . 

105) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Clark SJ. Support for medical marijuana 
use lower for kids than for adults. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 23, Issue 3, April 2015. Available at: hd:p://mottnpch.org/reporte- 
sorveys/support-medical-mariiuaaa-ase-lower-kids-Malts. 

106) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Davis MM. Many parents missing the link 
between child behavior and health. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 23, Issue 4, May 2015. Available at: 
http://mottnpch.org/ret?orts-sur\ , evs/manv-parents-misging-link-between-child-behavior-and-he.alih . 

107) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Clark SJ. Too convenient? Majority of 
adults support bans on powdered alcohol. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 24, Issue 1, June 2015. Available at: 

http://mottnpch.org/reporis-survevs/too-convenient-maiority-adults-support-bans-powde-red-alcohol . 

108) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Clark SJ. Safer, with more benefits: 
parents’ views on vaccines shifting. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 24, Issue 2, July 2015. Available at: 

http://mottnpeh.org/reporLs-survevs/safer~m.ore~benefite-parenfs%E2%80%99-vaceines-ylews- 

shiftin g . 

109) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Clark SJ. Top 10 child health problems: 
more concern for sexting, Internet safety. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 24, Issue 3, August 2015. Available at: 

http://mottnpch.org/reports-surveys/to p -fO-child.-health- p roblems-more-con.cern-sexting-intemet- 

safetv. 

110) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Davis MM. Parents conflicted about how to 
label, punish cyberbullying. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 24, Issue 4, September 2015. Available at: htfo.V/molfopch.org/reporls- 
surveys/parents-conflicted-about-how-label-purtish-cybeTbulIving . 


Opinion/Editorial Publications in Lay Press (non-peer-reviewed) 

1) Davis MM. Expanding kids’ care won’t socialize medicine. The Detroit News. October 10, 2007 

2) Osta AD, Davis MM. ‘Going green’ means gasping for air. The Detroit News. January 9, 2008. 

3) Tarini BA, Davis MM. Laws won’t erase genetic dilemmas. The Detroit News. May 28, 2008. 

4) Davis MM. Use Michigan’s existing tobacco laws to cover e-cigarettes. The Detroit Free Press. 
May 6, 2014. 


Davis CV 


37 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Eric P. Rothstein, CPA 

Principal 


MA, Economics, University of California-Davis, 1983 
A.B., Economics, Ripon College, 1981 


Distinguishing Qualifications 

4 Experienced Project Manager that has established strategic financial plans and designed rates for some of 
the nation's largest, most complex infrastructure programs and has secured acceptance of major, multi- 
year rate increases in politically charged environments. 

4 Expert in regionalization, facilitation of complex decisions affecting diverse stakeholder groups, evaluation 
of public/private partnerships, and strategic business planning. 

4 National leadership roles in the water industry including the Water Environment Federation (WEF) Utility 
Management Committee and American Water Works Association's (AWWA) Competitive Practices and 
Rates and Charges Committees. 

Expert Witness Depositions and Testimony 

4 Direct Testimony by Declaration (2014) - Superior Court Of California, County of Los Angeles, Central District, 
Cities of Cerritos, Downey and Signal Hill vs. Water Replenishment District of Southern California, Lead Case 
No. Bs128136 

4 Expert Witness Testimony (2013) - Nova Scotia Utility and Review Board: In the Matter of a Joint Application by 
the Halifax Regional Water Commission and the Halifax-Dartmouth Bridge Commission for a Determination of 
Appropriate Charges Related to the Use of the Angus L. Macdonald. (M06127) 

4 Expert Report (2013) - San Diego County Water Authority v. Metropolitan Water District of Southern 
California, Case No: CPF-10-510830 and CPF-12-512466, Superior Court of California, County of San 
Francisco, regarding rate setting challenges. 

4 Expert Witness Testimony (2013) -Hawaii Public Utilities Commission, In the Matter of the Application of 
Hawaiian Beaches Water Company, Inc., for review and approval of rate increases; revised rate schedules, 
Docket No. 2013-0203. 

4 Deposition And Expert Witness Testimony (2013): United States Bankruptcy Court, Northern District Of 
Alabama, Southern Division, In Re: Jefferson County, Alabama, a political subdivision of the State Of 
Alabama, Debtor, Case No.: 11-05736-Tbb, Chapter 9, The Bank Of New York Mellon as Indenture 
Trustee, et al., Plaintiffs v. Jefferson County, Alabama, Defendant, AP No.: 12-00016-Tbb, 

4 Expert Witness Testimony (2013) - Nova Scotia Utility and Review Board: Application for the Approval of a 
Schedule of Rates and Charges and Schedule of Rules and Regulations for the Delivery of Water, 
Wastewater and Stormwater Services, Matter No. M05463 



4 Expert Witness Testimony (2012) - Public Service Commission of Wisconsin: Application of City of 
Waukesha Water Utility, Waukesha County, Wisconsin, for Authority to Increase Water Rates Docket No. 
6240- WR- 107 

4 Expert Witness Testimony (2009-2011) - United States District Court, Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta 
Division, United States of American and the State of Georgia, Plaintiffs v. The City of Atlanta, Defendant, 
Civil Action File No, 1-98-CV-1956-TWT. (various hearings re: Schedule Extension, Service Delivery 
Strategy) 

4 Expert Witness Testimony (2012) - Public Service Commission of Wisconsin: Application of Oak Creek 
Water and Sewer Utility For Authority to Increase Water Rates, Docket No. 4310-WR-104 

4 Expert Witness Testimony (2011) - Nova Scotia Utility and Review Board: Application of the Halifax 
Regional Water Commission for approval of a Cost of Service and Rate Design Methodology (NSUARB-W- 
HRWC-R-11) 

4 Expert Witness Testimony (2010, 2014) - Public Service Commission of Wisconsin: Application of 
Milwaukee Water Works, Milwaukee Water Works, Milwaukee County for Authority to Increase Water 
Rates, Docket No. 3720-WR-1 07 and Docket No. 3720-WR-1 08 

4 Deposition (2010): The Bank of New York v, Jefferson County, Alabama, Civil Action No. CV-2009-02318. 

4 Expert Witness Testimony (2009) - Illinois Commerce Commission, lllinois-American Water Company, 
Proposed general increase in water and sewer rates, Docket No: 07-0507 

4 Expert Witness Testimony (2009) - In the Court of Appeals of Georgia; Fulton County Georgia et al. v. City 
of Atlanta, A08A2364 

Selected Key Project Experience 

For the U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Eastern District of Michigan, Southern Division Eric Rothstein has served 
as an independent utility advisor for mediation related to the creation of the Great Lakes Water Authority 
(GLWA). Following execution of a Memorandum of Understanding and Articles of Incorporation by the 
Incorporating Municipalities (City of Detroit, Macomb, Oakland and Wayne counties, and the State of Michigan), 
Mr. Rothstein was appointed to serve as Implementation Planning Program Manager for the standup of the 
GLWA - a regional utility serving approximately 40% of the population of the State of Michigan. 

For Water Replenishment District of Southern California, Eric Rothstein was engaged to provide an expert 
report related to the consistency of the District’s rate setting requirements with industry-standard practices 
contemplating proportionate distribution of cost responsibilities based on cost causation. These practices are 
consistent with prescripts of State of California law. 

For Jefferson County, Alabama, Eric Rothstein has served as the County’s rate consultant since 2010. He 
has reviewed cost-of service analyses and alternative rate proposals to address the County’s outstanding sewer 
warrant obligations, developed revisions to its sewer rates approved in November 2012, and again in 
September 2013, and is leading strategic financial planning related to the County’s bankruptcy Plan of 
Adjustment. Mr. Rothstein has been deposed and provided expert witness testimony in various court 
proceedings stemming from the County’s declaration of bankruptcy in 2011, and has led development of a 
Municipal Advisor Report related to a planned Series 2013 Sewer Warrant issue to effectuate the County’s exit 
from bankruptcy. 

For the Halifax Regional Water Commission, Eric Rothstein led development of a Cost of Service and Rate 
Design report to the Nova Scotia Utility and Accounting Review Board (NSUARB Docket No. NSUARB-W- 



HRWC-R-11), in response to the Board’s Order and Decision to hold separate hearings to determine 
appropriate ratemaking methodologies for Canada’s first regulated water, wastewater and stormwater utility. 
Eric led preparation of the report and the development of cost allocation and rate design models to illustrate the 
implications of alternative methodological approaches. Eric supported development of HRWC’s subsequent 
application for water, wastewater and stormwater rates filed with the NSUARB in December 2012 and provided 
expert witness testimony in support thereof in April 2012. In April 2014, Eric prepared a HRWC Cost Shares for 
Use of the Angus L, Macdonald Bridge and provided expert witness testimony in M06127 - Halifax-Dartmouth 
Bridge Commission/Halifax Regional Water Commission: Waterline on the Angus L. MacDonald Bridge - HDBC- 
G-14 

For the City of Atlanta, since 2004, Mr. Rothstein has served as the Department of Watershed Management’s 
primary coordinator for its revenue bond issues used to finance its $3 billion wastewater Consent Decree 
program. This has included issues in 2004, 2008, 2009 (2), 2013 and 2015 and, in 2006, implementation of its 
Tax-Exempt Commercial Paper program with a shelf registration of $1.2 billion. Mr. Rothstein led development 
of the Department’s Financial Capability Based Schedule Extension Request Report used to secure the City’s 
13-year extension of its wastewater Consent Decree schedule. Fie prepared each of the Department’s Financial 
Capability Assessment filings. Fie has led the development and updating of strategic financial planning tools for 
water and sewer rate development and policy-level consideration of overall program financing strategies (as 
well as detailed project expenditure, status, and schedule tracking). 

For the Egyptian Ministry of Housing, through a USAID contract, Mr. Rothstein developed guidance on tariff 
setting, capital project prioritization, and strategic planning for the newly established water and wastewater 
sector regulatory agency. The project involved the development of a guidance manual, detailed financial 
planning and cost-of-service analysis modeling, and testing of financial analysis and prioritization tools with four 
major Egyptian utilities. Mr. Rothstein has also provided presentations on financial planning and strategic 
planning principles to USAID staff and Technical Assistance contractors. 

For the Milwaukee Wholesale Customers, through sub-contracts with SHEH, Inc., Mr. Rothstein reviewed the 
Milwaukee Water Works rate increase applications filed in 2010 and 2014, reviewed pre-filed testimony, and 
offered expert witness testimony related to revenue requirements and appropriate rates of return at hearings 
before the Wisconsin Public Service Commission. 

For several wastewater permittees facing Consent Decrees including the City of Akron, East Bay Municipal 
Utility District, Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer District, Metropolitan Sewer District of St. Louis, and the 
City and County of Honolulu, Mr, Rothstein has assisted in the conduct of financial capability assessments 
per EPA prescribed methodologies and in the development of alternative approaches to assessment that more 
appropriately reflect utility capital financing options. These efforts have been used in the formulation of 
negotiation positions related to the scope and schedule of potential Consent Decree provisions. Mr. Rothstein 
is currently engaged with the City of Peoria, IL and with the Guam Waterworks Authority, in similar Consent 
Decree negotiations. 

For the National Association of Clean-Water Agencies, Mr. Rothstein has served as Principal Author for the 
development of several of the association's white papers and publications related to Financial Capability 
Assessments used to develop wastewater Consent Decree schedules. These publications include NACWA’s 
Financial Capability and Affordability in Wet Weather Negotiations (2007), and The Evolving Landscape for 
Financial Capability Assessment: Clean Water Act Negotiations and the Opportunities of Integrated Planning 
(2013). These papers provide critical reviews of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) 
established policies and guidance on financial capability assessments for wet weather programs and offers 
practical guidance for negotiations on enforcement policies and practices related to consideration of financial 
capability. 



For the City of Winnipeg, Manitoba, Mr, Rothstein served as Project Manager for a comprehensive cost-of- 
service rate studies for the City’s water, wastewater and stormwater systems conducted in 1997 and 2012, In 
1997, the consulting team facilitated decision-making through an extensive public involvement process that 
featured monthly meetings of a Citizen’s Advisory Committee comprised of a diverse set of stakeholder 
representatives, For both studies, detailed cost allocation analyses were conducted and customized computer 
rate analysis models developed to facilitate rate updating for budgetary changes, revision to cost allocations, 
and rate design modifications. 

For Augusta-Richmond County, Georgia, Mr, Rothstein has provided strategic financial planning, bond 
feasibility and comprehensive cost-of-service rate assistance since 2000. Strategic financial planning facilitated 
the City’s adoption of a seven-year, 11 percent per annum rate increase schedule to support infrastructure re- 
investment in excess of $400 million. Mr, Rothstein managed 3 bond feasibility studies over the course of the 
program implementation, helping the County to secure strong credit ratings and favorable financing. A cost-of- 
service study in 2004 involved special queries of a new billing system for development of user characteristic 
data and consideration of specific cost assignments for previously unsewered portions of the County’s 
wastewater system. 

Previous to his work as a utility management consultant, Mr. Rothstein served in several financial management 
positions for the City of Austin, Texas. In this capacity, he directed staffs of up to 22 members in utility 
ratemaking, evaluation of regionalization alternatives and proposed utility investments, analysis of capital 
financing options, internal control evaluation, and revenue forecasting. 

Certifications / Professional Licenses 

Certified Public Accountant 

Oregon License No. 7998, June 1995 


Membership In Professional Organisations 

American Water Works Association 

• Strategic Management Practices Committee 

• Rates and Charges Sub-Committee 

- Chair, Water Rate Structures and Pricing, AWWA M34 
Member, Water Rates, AWWA, Ml 

International Water Association 

• Economics and Statistics Specialist Group 

• Editorial Board, Utility Management International (2008-2012) 

National Association of Clean Water Agencies 

• Utility Management Committee 

Water Environment Federation 

• Utility Management Committee 

• Chair, Finance and Administration Sub-Committee 

• Chair, Financing and Charges for Wastewater Systems (M27), Manual of Practice Task Force 

• Coordinator, Asset Management Plot Topics Workshops, 2005 - 2007 

• Technical Practice Committee, Vice Chair 



Sustainability Reporting Statements for Wastewater Systems, WEF Special Publication, October 2012 (Task 
Force Chair, Chapter 1 Author) 

“The Business Case for Low Income Affordability Programs," Proceedings of the AWWA-WEF Utility 
Management Conference, Miami, FL, February 2012. 

GBMSD's Strategic Planning: A Portfolio Management Approach to Effective Utility Management” with Tom 
Sigmund, Proceedings of the AWWA-WEF Utility Management Conference, Miami, FL, February 2012. 

“Financial Sustainability in an Uncertain World" with Debbie Galardi, Water Utility Management International, 
vol. 6, issue 4 (December 2011) pp. 23-27. 

“Developing A Financially Sustainable Capital Program to Meet Consent Decree Requirements”, Proceedings of 
the Water Environment Federation Technology Exposition and Conference (WEFTEC), October 2009 

“Regionalization of Water Service in Central Florida: Capacity Rights Contracting for the Yankee Lake WTF”, 
Proceedings of the American Water Works Association (AWWA) Annual Conference and Exposition, June 2007 
and the Florida Water Resources Conference, April 2007 

“Affordability Tools,” Section 8: Affordability Special Publication , Water Environment Federation, 2007 

“Tough Choices in Paradise: Capital Project Prioritization on Oahu," with Ross Kaneko, Barry Usagawa, Scott 
Muraoka and Jason Takaki, Proceedings of the American Water Works Association (AWWA) - Water 
Environment Federation (WEF) Joint Management Conference, February 2007 and Proceedings of the 
American Water Works Association (AWWA) Annual Conference and Exposition, June 2007. 

“Financial Sustainability As A Foundation For infrastructure Development And Management: Best Practices” 
with Debbie Galardi, Water Utility Management International, vol. 2, issue 1 (March 2007) pp. 10-13 

Selected Presentations / Seminars 

“Exit from Bankruptcy: Jefferson County, Alabama's Historic Plan of Adjustment and $1.7 Billion Sewer Warrant 
Issue Sustainability Reporting Statements for Wastewater Systems”, Utility Management Conference, Austin, 

TX, February 2015. 

“The Business Case for Sustainability Reporting”, Sustainability Reporting Statements for Wastewater Systems 
Special Publication Workshop, WEFTEC 2013, October 2013. 

“Building Support for Rate Increases” Central States Water Environment Federation, May 17, 2013 

“Which Direction is Your Utility Heading", 2012 Illinois City Managers Association, Galena, Illinois, June 28, 

2012 

“Financial Sustainability in an Uncertain World", Illinois AWWA, March 2012 

“Doing More With Less: Financial Planning and Management in Stressful Times”, Central States Water 
Environment Federation Wisconsin Government Affairs Seminar, February 23, 2012 

“Financing Water Utilities’ Sustainability Initiatives: Challenging Institutionalized Governance and Market 
Failures” with Debbie Galardi, Proceedings of the 2012 AWWA Water Sustainability Conference, Portland, 
Oregon, March 2012. 

“Building Support for Rate Increases”, 2012 Central States Water Environment Association (CSWEA) 
Government Affairs Seminar, Madison, Wl, February 2012. 

“A Season on The Brink: Atlanta’s Financial Capability Based Consent Decree Extension” presented at the 
2011 AWWA-WEF Utility Management Conference, Denver, CO, February 2011. 

“Making Wet Weather Affordable: Never Let A Good Crisis Go To Waste”, National Association of Clean Water 
Agencies Winter Conference, Fort Lauderdale, FL, January 2011. 



“Water Efficiency Programs: Risk Management for an Uncertain World”, Wisconsin Water Association 
Conservation Seminar, September 2011. 

“Financial Capability Assessment Revisited: Structuring Consent Decrees To Recognize Capital Financing 
Constraints And Market Change” presented at the 2010 AWWA-WEF Utility Management Conference, San 
Francisco, CA, February 2010. 

“Rock River Water Reclamation District Strategic Financial Planning”, Illinois Association of Wastewater 
Agencies, September 17, 2009 

“Socially Responsible Investment in Water Quality: Balancing Community Priorities and Pricing”, American 
Water Works Association Annual Conference and Exposition, Atlanta, GA, June 2009. 

“Adaptive Financial Management”, CSO Partnership, Chicago, April 2009 

“Capital Financing Strategies and Constraints: Lessons of the Political Economy “, National Association of Clean 
Water Agencies Winter Conference, Atlanta, GA, February 2009. 

“Atlanta’s Water and Wastewater System Financing: An Update", American Water Works Association Annual 
Conference and Exposition, Atlanta, GA, June 2008. 

“Inside/Outside Rates: Forthcoming Refinements in the Ml Manual”, American Water Works Association Annual 
Conference and Exposition, Atlanta, GA, June 2008. 

“Financial Capability Assessments & Affordability: Implications of EPA Criteria”, American Water Works 
Association Annual Conference and Exposition, June 2007 

“Proven Financial Management Fundamentals Demonstrated Through National & International Case Studies” 
presented at the Illinois Section, American Water Works Association conference, Springfield, IL, March 2007 

“National Trends Define Strategic Planning Imperatives," presented at the Wisconsin Section, American Water 
Works Association conference, Wisconsin Dells, Wl, September 2006, and Wisconsin Water Environment 
Association Government Affairs seminar, Madison, Wl, March 2007. 

“Financial Capability and the Cost of Clean” presented at the National Association of Clean Water Agencies, 
Winter Conference, St. Petersburg, FL; February 2007. 



To: Governor Rick Snyder 

From: JA 

Re: Flint After Action Meeting 

Date: October 20, 2015 


Governor, 

Attached is a draft press release to be reviewed with the after action team tomorrow morning. 

In addition, Rich & Flarvey are vetting & reaching out to potential Flint resident to join the task force: 

1) Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, MD of Mott Children's Hospital, long standing and respected member of the Flint community, 
speaks his mind and very professional. 


Rich will invite him to the meeting tomorrow by phone or in person. 

Attached are resumes for Kolb, Dr. Davis, and Eric Rothstein. 

Draft Agenda: 

1) Introductions 

2) Mission of Task Force 

3) Background Info 

4) Discussion of Timeline 

5) Q & A from Task Force Members 

6) Communications Strategy/Review Press Release 

Suggested Goals for Task Force: 

1) Thorough review of all steps taken in Flint regarding switch to Flint River and back GLWA. 

a. Create Timeline of actions 

b. Establish why each action was taken 

2) Review of role of Feds, EM, State, City Council, and Mayor in process. 

a. Establish best practices for Feds, State, Local, and EM to work together in future situations 

b. Indicate where coordination could have been and should be improved 

3) Review of DEO. & DHHS actions & protocols 

a. Did DEO. & DHHS follow the proper procedures? 

b. Do the procedures need to change? 

4) Provide guidance for switch back to GWLA 

a. Ensure proper corrosion controls & testing is in place 

b. Highlight steps for eventual switch to Karegnondi 

5) Testing Beyond Flint 

a. What practices need to change in communities outside of Flint? 

b. What change in law is recommended to ensure all Michiganders are drinking clean water? 

Suggested Timeline: 

The task force members have indicated that 2 months is the earliest possible time to properly conduct a full after action 
report. In reality, they suggest 3 months is more feasible. Given the holidays, a 2 month timeline puts us roughly right 
around Christmas. I would suggest we set a 3 month goal. 




Oct 21: After Action Team Announced 

Jan 8: Preliminary After Action Report Submitted for Internal Review 
Jan 22: Final After Action Report Submitted 
Week of January 25: Report Released 



RICK SHYOm 
AWSSWCJpl 


State os' Michigan 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE 

KANfttNCf 


Bft!AN CmtBY 
OOVfiENOil 


Contacts: 

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 

Sara Wurfel or Dave Murray 

Wednesday, Oct. 21 , 2015 

517-335-6397 



Gov. Rick Snyder announces formation of Flint Water 
After Action Report Commission 

Experts will provide ongoing monitoring of city water system 

LANSING, Mich. - Gov. Rick Snyder today announced a new task force to review the 
state’s actions regarding water usage and testing in Flint. The commission will conduct 
a thorough review and lay out recommendations on future guidelines for water testing. It 
will also monitor the transition of Flint’s city water system back to the Great Lakes Water 
Authority, and its eventual transition to the Karegnondi Water Authority pipeline. 

The commission will be co-chaired by Ken Sikkema of Public Sector Consultants and 
Chris Kolb, of the Michigan Environmental Council. Also serving will be Dr. Matthew 
Davis of the University of Michigan Health System, and Eric Rothstein, of the Galardi 
Rothstein Group. 

“As stated previously, transitioning back to the Great Lakes Water Authority is a good 
first step to protecting public health in Flint, but it’s not the last step,” Snyder said. 
“Bringing in outside experts to evaluate our actions and help monitor and advise on 
technical issues will be key to continuing work on the comprehensive action plan and 
ensuring safe drinking water for all the citizens of Flint.” 

Ken Sikkema is a senior policy fellow at Public Sector Consultants, where he 
specializes in public finance, environment, and energy policy. Prior to joining the firm, 
Sikkema served in both the Michigan House and Senate, culminating with four years as 
Senate Majority Leader. He has also served as both an adjunct and visiting professor at 
Grand Valley State University. 

Chris Kolb is president of the Michigan Environmental Council, a statewide coalition of 
70 environmental, public health and faith-based nonprofit groups. Before joining the 
MEC, Kolb represented Ann Arbor in the state House for six years and served eight 
years on the Ann Arbor City Council. He has been president of the MEC for eight years. 

Matthew Davis, M.D., M.A.P.P., is Professor of Pediatrics and Internal Medicine at the 
University of Michigan Health System and Professor of Public Policy at the Gerald R. 
Ford School at the University of Michigan, having joined the faculty in 2000. He is the 
founding Director of the C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children's Health 
and the National Voices Project. Dr. Davis also previously served as the Chief Medical 
Executive of the Michigan Department of Community Health/Department of Health and 
Human Services. 







Eric Rothstein is a national water issues consultant and principal at the Galardi 
Rothstein Group. He served as an independent advisor on the creation of the Great 
Lakes Water Authority. Rothstein also has served as Jefferson County, Alabama’s rate 
consultant and municipal advisor for litigation related to the county’s bankruptcy and 
issuance of $1 .7 billion in sewer warrants and led strategic financial planning for the City 
of Atlanta’s Department of Watershed Management. He has more than 30 years of 
experience in water, wastewater and stormwater utility finance and rate-making 
assessments. 

As Gov. Snyder previously stated, reconnecting with the authority will not completely 
resolve the city’s problem with lead service lines or aging infrastructure. It will take time 
for pipes in Flint to become coated with the phosphate corrosion control. 

To best protect public health, state and local authorities will continue to carry out steps 
outlined on Oct. 2 in a comprehensive action plan, including continued testing, the use 
of faucet filters and providing residents with accurate information about steps to 
eliminate lead exposure. The Michigan Departments of Environmental Quality is 
continuing to provide free water filters, free lead testing through the state laboratory for 
Flint water customers, and hiring additional staff to conduct health exposure monitoring 
for lead in drinking water. 


#### 



Subject: 

Location: 

Start: 

End: 

Recurrence: 

Meeting Status: 

Organizer: 

Required Attendees: 


Agen/Quebbeman/Weber re Flint task force 
JA 

Fri 11/13/2015 8:30 AM 
Fri 11/13/2015 9:00 AM 

(none) 

Meeting organizer 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Weber, Travis (GOV); Thomet, Ruth (GOV); Quebbeman, Marsha (GOV) 


l 



From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 08, 2015 8:08 AM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Biehl, Laura (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth 

(GOV) 

Subject: Re: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 

Lis ting names is going to be problematic since there are many firms that are engaged of which I am unaware: 

2) GM 

3) Flint Community Foundation 

4) United Way of Flint 

5) Absopure 

6) Home Depot 

7) UAW locals 

8) Similac 

9) A number of faith based organizations 

10) Flint Food Bank 

11) McClaren Hospital 

12) Hurley Hospital 

There are others that have contributed that I don't have information on. 

It would be easier say something like, "I want to thank the number of people, organizations, philanthropic and 
corporations that have engaged to address the problem. They didn't point fingers and access blame, they saw the 
problem and contributed to solutions, and that action says something special about this state, we rally to help each 
other." 


On Oct 7, 2015, at 7:12 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) <b airdr@nnichigan.KOv > wrote: 

I think this looks good but are we missing an opportunity to shout out all the entities that have stepped 
up to help? GM, Home Depot, etc. etc.? 

If Harvey has the full list, perhaps it could even be attached as an addendum. The point is that a lot of 
people did come together to address the problem, including the private sector and various volunteer 
organizations. I think it says something special about this state rallying to help one of its cities. 

Rich 


Best, 

Harvey Hollins III, Director 
Governor’ s Office of Urban Initiatives 



Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Biehl, Laura (GOV)" < BiehSt@michigan.gov > 

Date: October 7, 2015 at 6:46:28 PM EDT 

To: "Murray, David (GOV)" < M u rray D 1 @ m = ch i ga n . go v > , "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" 

< ,4ge n j @ m i ch i ga n ,gov > . "Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" < Wu rf ei s @ rrs i ch i ga n . mv > . "Heaton, Anna 
(GOV)" < HeatonAt^michigan.gov >. "Kennedy, Jordan (GOV)" 
< KannedyJ4ffimichigan.gov >. "Brown, Jessica (GOV)" < BrownJ53iSrnichigan.gov >, 

"Paciorek, Josh (GOV)" < PaciorekiiSrnichigan.gov >, "Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS)" 

< i a s h e rg (S ni i ch iga n .gov >, "Minicuci, Angela (DHHS)" < MinicuciA@michlgan.gov >. 
"Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS)" < Osnerj@mich;gan.goy >. "Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" 
< VVurfels@n'ilchig3n.gov >, "Tommasulo, Karen (DEQ)" < TomfflasuloK@michigan.gov >, 

"Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" < dem en te @ m i ch i ga n . gov >, "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 
< muchmorediS)michlgan.gov >, "Posthumus, Dick (GOV)" < Posthumusd@michigan.gov >, 

"Baird, Richard (GOV)" < bairdr@michifiari.gov >, "Calley, Brian (GOV)" 

"F° rs t ner < Nathaniel (GOV)" < forstnern 1 @ m I ch iga n .go v > 

Subject: RE: URGENT review please - Draft Flint water release 

See new version attached. Small revisions made and placeholders added for Mayor and 
Mott Foundation Quotes. 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 6:12 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Ag en j@ i-nichiga n.go v>; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Biehl, Laura (GOV) < B j.e h I j . (5R n A j c hi Ea n . o v> ; Heaton, Anna 
(GOV) <HeatOQ^ Kennedy, Jordan (GOV) <Keained;yj4 

Brown, Jessica (GOV) <Browrij53^ Paciorek, Josh (GOV) 

<P3Ciore kj{® mi chig3n.gov >: Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS) <lssherg@m[c Minicuci, 

Angela (DHHS) <Minja;dA^ Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS) 

<liisQed.@.(I)ith!gsn.goy>; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wyrfeis ; @:nich Tommasulo, 

Karen (DEQ) <Tpmmasu)oK@m Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

< V. I .T: Q.t i .Qb J. J Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Posthumus, Dick (GOV) < Posf.humusd®michigan.sov> : Baird, Richard (GOV) 

J.C.(1.C.^?.Dn Q [ IS =?.0. : Sf?. >:> ; Calley, Brian (GOV) Forstner, 

Nathaniel(GOV) <fprstruyTi 1 (£> mi on igs n.goy> 

Subject: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 

Team, 

Please review this draft press release for the Thursday announcement in Flint. This 
incorporates some suggested edits to the strong draft from DEQ earlier today. 


Thank you very much. 




Gov. Rick Snyder: Move back to Detroit 
water provides best protection for public 

health in Flint 

State, Mott Foundation and city form partnership to fund 

switch 

FLINT, Mich. - Flint families and children will be better protected by reconnecting 
with the Great Lakes Water Authority as the source of the city’s drinking water, 
Gov. Rick Snyder said. 

Snyder said Thursday that he will request the state Legislature to provide a 
portion of the $12 million needed to reconnect with the authority, with the Flint 
city government providing $2 million and the Charles Stewart Mott Foundation 
donating $4 million. 

The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of 
Environmental Quality today also committed an additional $3.5 million for water 
filters, free lead testing through the state laboratory for Flint water customers, 
and hiring additional staff to conduct health exposure monitoring for lead in 
drinking water. 

Flint city leaders requested the state’s help to fund the reconnection after a 
Wednesday meeting of Flint’s Technical Advisory Committee. Flint’s move to the 
Great Lakes Water Authority is expected to cost about $1 .3 million per month 
until the Karegnondi Water Authority is completed next summer. 

“All Flint residents need clean, safe drinking water,” Snyder said. “The technical 
experts helping the city on its water advisory all agree this move back to the 
Great Lakes Water Authority provides the best public health protection for 
children and families. This effort today is the result of people coming together to 
solve a problem. I appreciate Detroit’s willingness to reconnect with Flint, the 
Mott Foundation’s generous donation, and the dedication of all parties to come 
together to protect Flint families and children.” 

The move to Detroit water, which is drawn from Lake Huron, carries many public 
health benefits. As large bodies of water, the Great Lakes are naturally prone to 
fewer problems from large rain events and other runoff issues that can be 
present in shallower rivers. Additionally, the Great Lakes Water Authority has 
already fully optimized its corrosion control, using phosphates to help coat the 
insides of pipes and prevent lead from leaching into the water. 

However, reconnecting with the authority will not completely resolve the city’s 
problem with lead service lines or aging infrastructure. It will take time for pipes in 
Flint to become coated with the phosphate corrosion control. Additionally, some 
households in the city could experience lead in their drinking water until all lead 
pipes and plumbing are replaced. 

To best protect public health, Snyder said state and local authorities will continue 
to carry out steps outlined on Oct. 2 in a comprehensive action plan, including 
continued testing, the use of faucet filters and providing residents with accurate 
information about steps to eliminate lead in water. 



Free filters are available for current MDHHS clients at the 125 E. Union St. or 
4809 Clio Road MDHHS office locations. 

For residents who are not currently enrolled in MDHHS assistance programs, 
free filters are available at the Genesee County Community Action Resource 
Department offices at 2727 Lippincott and 601 North Saginaw in Flint. Staff will 
be at all four locations from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, to distribute 
filters and assist residents who have questions about proper installation. 

At the Lippincott location only, extended hours will be offered this weekend, 
including until 7 p.m. on Thursday and Friday and from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. on 
Saturday. 

Other good practices for residents concerned about lead include turning on the 
cold water tap and running the water until it’s as cold as it will go. Additionally, 
only use cold water for cooking, drinking and especially mixing baby formula. 

School test results released; more investigation planned 

The state today also released the first results from its lead screening program in 
schools and homes. Of 37 total samples taken at 13 buildings, four samples 
spread over three buildings exceeded the federal action level of 15 parts per 
billion. 

However, this sampling provides only an initial screen, and the state is 
committing to further testing water and inspecting plumbing at these schools. 

Until testing is complete, schools are advised to continue using bottled water and 
filtration as a precaution to protect children. 

In addition, free testing is still available for any other Flint school, including 
daycares and Head Starts. Free testing is also available for any Flint resident. 

Additional information, including more detailed lead screening results, is available 

at wyvvv.michi q an q ov/flintvvater. 

a a a 

IT I I I 1 
II II II 


Dave Murray 

Deputy Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

MurravDljS rnichigan.gov 

517-335-6397, office 

iSS^aHmobile 

Twitter:@michigandmurray 


<151008 Flint water release V2.docx> 



From: 

Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, January 27, 2015 3:11 PM 

To: 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Cc: 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: 

RE: Flint water issue 


Greetings All, 

The meetings on Wednesday that Harvey referenced on Senior Staff call regarding the Flint water issue are actually 
being facilitated by Dick Posthumus' Office. They will be held in the Romney building as follows: 

10:00am - 11:00am (Internal Meeting in the 2nd Floor Executive Conference Room) Dick Posthumus Dennis Muchmore 
John Walsh Beth Clement Tom Saxton Harvey Hollins 

2:00pm-3:pm (Full Meeting in the Governor's Conference Room) Jerry Ambrose Mayor Walling Howard Croft, Director of 
the Department of Public Works Tom Saxton Dick Posthumus Dennis Muchmore Beth Clement Sen. Ananich Andy 
Leavitt John Walsh Harvey Hollins 


Original Message 

From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, January 27, 2015 2:30 PM 
To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: RE: Flint water issue 

Stacie will set it up. 

Original Message 

From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, January 27, 2015 2:27 PM 
To: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: Flint water issue 

Hi there Harvey - 

Just following up on this per brief conversation/mention at yesterday's senior staff meeting and Dave's voice mail to you 
as well. 

I believe you had indicated you had a meeting on this tomorrow, yes? 

We need to touch base and get all facts on this situation ASAP. Turning into unfortunate and unnecessary PR issue that 
we're trying to work with Treasury and DEQto be on top of, stem, find resolution, etc. 


l 



Please call our office today to connect with Dave (as our lead on this) or myself or Jarrod if he's not available for some 
reason. 

Thanks much, 

SW 

Sent from my iPad 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Friday, February 06, 2015 4:46 PM 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
RE: Flint Water 


Keep in mind we paid for the consultant. 


From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Friday, February 06, 2015 3:59 PM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Subject: FW: Flint Water 

Heads up -- given all the good coverage we got from our Flint water event earlier this week, this seems like an attempt 
to throw us back under the bus and draw more controversy/'pubiidty to the water issue, 
i would advise we stir very dear of this event or helping to orchestrate it 


From: Kelly Rossman-McKinney 

Sent: Friday, February 06, 2015 3:22 PM 

To: Murray, David (GOV); Hollins, Flarvey (GOV) 

Cc: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: Flint Water 

Dave & Harvey: We are working with Veolia North America, the water consulting team Flint has hired to "assess the 
situation." We're planning to hold a media roundtable with city officials on Tuesday to introduce the Veolia team to 
local reporters. Gerry Ambrose suggested we invite some of the folks you invited to attend the newser earlier this 
week. Is that a list you can share with me or would it be better for the invite to come from you or the EM directly? I 
don't have a specific time yet but can provide that information for you when it is available. What do you think? 

Kelly 


PS I forgot to say thanks!!!! 



Kelly Rossman-McKinney 

Truscott Ross&rsars * truscoitrossrnan.oom 
3oji Tower * 124 W Allegan St, Sts. 800 * Lansing, Mi 48933 
200 Renaissance Center, Sts. 3180 • Detroit, Ml 48243 
125 Ottawa Ave. N.W., Sts 236 • Grand Rapids, Mi 49503 


Cali- 

Office- (517) 487-9320 
Fax: (517) 487-5080 


1 



From: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, March 03, 2015 10:04 PM 

To: 

Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Cc: 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Hollins, 


Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Contaminated Drink Water if Flint 


No question although the city could use a little positive publicity right now. 

On Mar 3, 2015, at 1 1:57 AM, Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) < WorkmanW@michigan . gov > wrote: 

if this does happen, we need to figure who would hand out the water, it should not be the City, it would 
undercut every point they are making. St probably should also he reserved for people who can't afford 
to buy water. 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, March 02, 2015 11:57 PM 

To: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Agen, Jarrod 
(GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: Contaminated Drink Water if Flint 

Might want to get Jarrod and Terry Stanton on this as well as Harvey. Otherwise it will get out 
of hand. It's in the city's long term interest to make the KWA work and we can make the river 
water safe, but we need to work with the ministers this week to help them out. It's tough for 
everyday people to listen to financial issues and water mumbo jumbo when all they see is 
problems. You can't expect the ministers to hold the tide on this problem. 

How about cutting a deal with Ice Mountain or Bill Young and buying some water for the people 
for a time? $250K buys a lot of drinking water and we could distribute it through the churches 
while we continue to make the water even safer. 

If we procrastinate much longer in doing something direct we'll have real trouble. 

Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 

From: Kelly Rossman-McKinney <krossman @t ruscottrossman.com> 

Date: March 2, 2015 at 8:26:34 AM EST 

To: Dennis Muchmore <muchmored @ rnichigan.gov> 

Subject: FW: Contaminated Drink Water if Flint 

Please call me so we can discuss. This issue is out of hand. We do pro bono work for 
the city on an as-needed basis, plus we also work for Veolia, the water consultant they 
brought on board. I'm concerned about the implications that this may have racial 
overtones. Ugh. 


l 




Kelly Rossman4v1e&mney 

CEO 

Truscott Rossman * tfuscottrossman.com 
Soji Tower * 124 W Allegan St, Sts. 800 * Lansing, Ml 48933 
200 Renaissance Center, Ste. 3160 * Detroit. Ml 48243 
125 Ottawa Ave. N.W',. Ste 235 • Grand Rapids, Ml 48503 




From: Gerald Ambrose [mailto:g3mbrose@citvQffiint.com] 

Sent: Monday, March 02, 2015 7:36 AM 

To: Kelly Rossman-McKinney 

Subject: Fwd: Contaminated Drink Water if Flint 


Welcome to Monday. Please advise asap as to any next steps you recommend, if 
any. 

Forwarded message 

From: "Dayne Walling" <dwalling @c i ty offlint.com> 

Date: Mar 2, 2015 7:29 AM 

Subject: Fwd: Contaminated Drink Water if Flint 

To: "Gerald Ambrose" < gambrose@citvoffl int , eom > "Natasha Henderson" 

< n hender son @ci tvoffl int . eom >. "Peter Bade" < pbade@ci tyoffl int . com > 

Cc: 


FYF 

Forwarded message 

From: 

Date: Sat, Feb 28, 2015 at 2:09 PM 
Subject: Contaminated Drink Water if Flint 
To: 

Cc: "mail 1 0 3 @f oxtv. com " <mail 1 03 @ foxtv.com>. WFLT 1420 Am 
< wflt 1 420am@aol. com> . Abcl2news <abc 1 2ne w s@ abc 1 2 . com>. Wnem Desk 
< wnem@,wnem . com >. Scot Johnson Wnem < scot.jobnson@wnem.com >. 
" news@wir.com " <news@wj r . com>. "assigmeritdesk@wdiy.com" 


< assigmentdesk@wdiv. com >. "D. Adams" < dadams5@mlive.com >. 
fox2newsdesk@.foxtv . com , " nikkibedoarski @cum u lus . com " 
<nik3dbednarski@:cumulus.com>. "mag e org e@fr ee p ress.com" 



<wx yz desk @, w x y z.com>. " wilt 1 420@aol.com " <wflt 1 420 @ aol. com>. 
" cspacouriernews@yahoo.com " < cspacour ier new , s@.v ahoo . com >. 
"dshepardson@depnewss.com" <dsh.e p ardson @d epnewss.com>. 
"promotion @w smh.com" < p romotio n@w smh. com>. Eric Mays 
< ema vs@.city ofHint . com >. Emergency Manager < em@,cityofflint.com >. Brenda 
Williams <brwi1 liam s;@ ; v i slonmpinc. com>. ESS33BSB3 


2 







Vicky Van Buren 

<wanburen @d t y ofTlint.com>. Jackie Poplar <j p o p l a r@c i i y offi int. corn>. | 

Wantwaz Davis 

< wdav 1 s@ ci t voftl int. . com >. 

"hwinford @ ci ty offl in L corn " <h wi n ford @ ci tvoffllnt . corn>, Inez Brown 


<ibrownfS).citvofflint.com>, Peter Bade <pbade'fS).cityofflint.com> 



Good Afternoon, Attorney Randall! 

Thank you for returning my call on the other day! Again, my concern as is others in the City of Flint, 
Michigan regarding the drinking water source for the water customers of the City of Flint. I have 
enclosed one of the lasted article written by the local newspaper, "The Flint Journal" regarding the 
Flint River water. Needless to say, the water is dangerous to our health! GM will not use the water 
at its Engine Plant in Flint to wash engines parts! 

We need your help to guide us to the profession people that know about "Bad Drinking Water and 
Environmental Racism". I truly believe it's "Environmental Racism" at its worst or should I say 
best! As a resident of flint, Past President of the Flint Branch NAACP, newly elected VP of the Flint 
Branch NAACP and the most listen to broadcast host during that time on Flint's premiere gospel 
station, WFLT 1420AM, each Saturday morning from 9:30-1 0AM, I have challenged our elected 
officials to step up to the plate and fix this water problem! 

I'll be asking the Executive Committee of the Flint Branch of the NAACP to request from our 
National Office if we can proceed with a possible "Environmental Racism" lawsuit with their 
assistance and the assistance of other civil rights groups and others to "file briefs in support of our 
efforts against those parties involved with the changing and the using of the Flint River as our water 
drinking source. 

The City of Flint has Emergency Manager #4 since our "takeover", and cares less about the 
residents or the water concerns of its Customers of Flint! Please help us with our problem by 
directing us to the right professional people. Please go 

to www. actionpa org/fjuronde/ei.html regarding "Environmental Racism" I have attached an article 
from the Flint Journal, and may Google other articles regarding the Flint's water source, including 
how we arrived to where we are on today. 

Thank you very much in advance!! 

I remain. 



Concerned Resident 


3 








Dayne Walling 

Mayor, City of Flint 

City Flail, 1101 S. Saginaw St. 

Flint, MI 48502 
810-766-7346 
mayor@citvofIlmt.com 
www.cityofflint.com 

follow me on twitter at http://twitter.com/mayorvvaliing 


4 



From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, March 05, 2015 8:32 AM 

To: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Subject: Re: FLINT JOURNAL : posted at 1 p.m. today. 


Charles is the biggest blowhard in the state these days. I wish he would take all that energy and push it to solving 
problems instead of complaining all the time. 


On Mar 3, 2015, at 3:29 PM, Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) < WurfejB@miehlgan.gov > wrote: 


<image001.jpg> 


Flint water almost like 'gas chambers for Jews/ says 
Sharpton group activist 


Ron Fonger | rfonc8erl@mi8ve.com By Ron Fonger | rfoooerl@m 88 ve,c 0 m The Flint Journal 
on March 03, 2015 at 12:54 PM, updated March 03, 2015 at 2:10 PM 


The Rev. Charles Williams II speaks during a press conference for the National Action Network's coordinated response to 


the Trayvon Martin verdict in this 2013 Flint Journal file photo. Flint Journal file photo 


FLINT — The president of the Michigan chapter of Al Sharpton's National Action Network says Flint 
water is "almost as bad as gas chambers for Jews." 

The Rev. Charles Williams II, speaking at a news conference and water giveaway in Flint on Monday, 
March 3, made the comment, which appeared on television station WEYI-TV. 

The city of Flint issued a statement saying officials are "extremely disappointed" by the pastor's 
remarks, including his comparison of consumption of Flint's water to "genocide." 

"We are extremely disappointed in Rev. Charles Williams' comments but certainly understand — and 
share — his frustration," the city statement says. "With that said, we find Rev. Williams' accusations 
are a gross misrepresentation of the Flint water condition and a wholly inappropriate comparison." 


l 



When contacted by The Flint Journal-MLive for comment today, Williams referred a reporter to his 
Twitter page. 

Steven C. Low, executive director of the Flint Jewish Federation, called Williams' comments "an 
inappropriate invocation of the Holocaust" that "diminishes what survivors went through." 

"Drawing such a comparison doesn't shed any light on the water problems," said Low, who called on 
Williams to apologize for his remarks. 

The news conference Williams spoke at is one of several that have been held since Flint notified 
customers in January that the city is in violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act because of the level 
of total trihalomethanes (TTHM) in water tested during the last 10 months. 

Outspoken residents have since protested the price, color, odor and overall quality of the water. 

City officials have said Flint water is safe for the vast majority of the people to drink but warned in 
January notices that TTHM can pose increased health risks for those with a compromised immune 
system, the elderly, pregnant women and infants. 

Testing during the last two months has shown the city is meeting all health and safety standards 
for water, and a consultant is expected to deliver a report this week, detailing recommendations for 
improving the quality of drinking water here. 

Flint's water problems, including multiple boil water advisories last summer, bloomed after the city 
began using the Flint River as its drinking water source in April. 

Prior to that switch, the city had used Lake Huron water, pre-treated and purchased from the city of 
Detroit. 

The Flint statement says "some people may still have issues with discoloration, or do not like the taste 
of the (higher) mineral content river water (but) these do not amount to a safety issue." 

Williams responded to a request for comment with a text message to The Journal, saying "quote my 

Twitter feed." 


2 



In a Twitter message, the pastor wrote, "I (hear) #flint city officials upset at my comparisons 
yesterday. They should use their anger 2 make sure resident aren't drinking death water." 

In another message, Williams wrote, "Isn't it extreme to knowingly sell residents contaminated water 
people in #flint forced to buy liver disease water? What is that? #Genocide." 

In addition to his work as president of NAN-Michigan, Williams is the pastor of King Solomon Baptist 
Church of Detroit. 

This week was not Williams' first appearance in the spotlight in Flint. 

In 2013, he demanded Hurley Medical Center officials answer charges that they granted a father's 
request that only white nurses care for his infant child. 

The hospital eventually agreed to pay nearly $200,000 in total to three black nurses who sued the 
hospital after claiming they were discriminated against when they weren't allowed to treat that white 
baby. 

NAN describes itself as one of the leading civil rights organizations in the nation with chapters 
throughout the United States. The organization was founded in 1991 by Sharpton. 

Ron Fonger is a reporter for The Flint Journal. Contact him a trforsgerl hve.com or 810-247-9963. 

Follow him on Twitter, Facebook orGoogle+. 

© 2015 MLive.com. All rights reserved. 

Brad Wurfel 

Communications Director 

Michigan Department of Environmental Quality 

517-284-6713 

iiSMKSSJcell 


3 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 


Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Thursday, March 05, 2015 8:58 AM 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 
RE: FLINT JOURNAL : posted at 1 p.m. today. 


Sensationalism on the part of the media and Charles. 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, March 05, 2015 8:32 AM 
To: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Subject: Re: FLINT JOURNAL : posted at 1 p.m. today. 

Charles is the biggest blowhard in the state these days. I wish he would take all that energy and push it to solving 
problems instead of complaining all the time. 


On Mar 3, 2015, at 3:29 PM, Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) 


wrote: 


<image001.jpg> 

Flint water almost like 'gas chambers for Jews/ says 
Sharpton group activist 


Ron Fonger | rfonqerI@mS8ve.com By Ron Fonger | rfqnqerl@rrt88vss.eom The Flint Journal 
on March 03, 2015 at 12:54 PM, updated March 03, 2015 at 2:10 PM 


The Rev. Charles Williams II speaks during a press conference for the National Action Network's coordinated response to 


the Trayvon Martin verdict in this 2013 Flint Journal file photo. Flint Journal file photo 


FLINT — The president of the Michigan chapter of Al Sharpton's National Action Network says Flint 
water is "almost as bad as gas chambers for Jews." 

The Rev. Charles Williams II, speaking at a news conference and water giveaway in Flint on Monday, 
March 3, made the comment, which appeared on television station WEYI-TV. 

The city of Flint issued a statement saying officials are "extremely disappointed" by the pastor's 
remarks, including his comparison of consumption of Flint's water to "genocide." 


l 



"We are extremely disappointed in Rev. Charles Williams' comments but certainly understand -- and 
share — his frustration," the city statement says. "With that said, we find Rev. Williams' accusations 
are a gross misrepresentation of the Flint water condition and a wholly inappropriate comparison." 

When contacted by The Flint Journal-MLive for comment today, Williams referred a reporter to his 
Twitter page. 

Steven C. Low, executive director of the Flint Jewish Federation, called Williams' comments "an 
inappropriate invocation of the Holocaust" that "diminishes what survivors went through." 

"Drawing such a comparison doesn't shed any light on the water problems," said Low, who called on 
Williams to apologize for his remarks. 

The news conference Williams spoke at is one of several that have been held since Flint notified 
customers in January that the city is in violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act because of the level 
of total trihalomethanes (TTHM) in water tested during the last 10 months. 

Outspoken residents have since protested the price, color, odor and overall quality of the water. 

City officials have said Flint water is safe for the vast majority of the people to drink but warned in 
January notices that TTHM can pose increased health risks for those with a compromised immune 
system, the elderly, pregnant women and infants. 

Testing during the last two months has shown the city is meeting all health and safety standards 
for water, and a consultant is expected to deliver a report this week, detailing recommendations for 
improving the quality of drinking water here. 

Flint's water problems, including multiple boil water advisories last summer, bloomed after the city 
began using the Flint River as its drinking water source in April. 

Prior to that switch, the city had used Lake Huron water, pre-treated and purchased from the city of 
Detroit. 

The Flint statement says "some people may still have issues with discoloration, or do not like the taste 
of the (higher) mineral content river water (but) these do not amount to a safety issue." 


2 



Williams responded to a request for comment with a text message to The Journal, saying "quote my 

Twitter feed.” 

In a Twitter message, the pastor wrote, "I (hear) #flint city officials upset at my comparisons 
yesterday. They should use their anger 2 make sure resident aren't drinking death water." 

In another message, Williams wrote, "Isn't it extreme to knowingly sell residents contaminated water 
people in #flint forced to buy liver disease water? What is that? #Genocide." 

In addition to his work as president of NAN-Michigan, Williams is the pastor of King Solomon Baptist 
Church of Detroit. 

This week was not Williams' first appearance in the spotlight in Flint. 

In 2013, he demanded Hurley Medical Center officials answer charges that they granted a father's 
request that only white nurses care for his infant child. 

The hospital eventually agreed to pay nearly $200,000 in total to three black nurses who sued the 
hospital after claiming they were discriminated against when they weren't allowed to treat that white 
baby. 

NAN describes itself as one of the leading civil rights organizations in the nation with chapters 
throughout the United States. The organization was founded in 1991 by Sharpton. 

Ron Fonger is a reporter for The Flint Journal. Contact him a trfontcgerl §tmSsve,coirs or 810-247-9963. 

Follow him on Twitter, Facebook orGoogle+. 

© 2015 MLive.com. All rights reserved. 

Brad Wurfel 

Communications Director 

Michigan Department of Environmental Quality 

517-284-6713 



From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, March 24, 2015 10:44 AM 

To: Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GO V) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: FW: PRESS RELEASE: EM Statement on Flint's Water 

Attachments: EM Statement on Water 3.24.2015.pdf; EM Letter to Treasury Regarding Water.PDF 

FYi just in case. 

What is latest on our involvement in this issue and coordination with Flint EM? 

From: Jason Lorenz [mailto:jlorenz@cityofflintxom] 

Sent: Tuesday, March 24, 2015 10:35 AM 

Subject: PRESS RELEASE: EM Statement on Flint's Water 

For Immediate Release 

Emergency Manager Statement on Water: Spending Extra $12 Million on Detroit Water 

“Incomprehensible” When Flint Water Just as Safe 

Flint, Michigan - March 24, 2015 - At the City Council meeting held on Monday, March 23, 2015, Flint City 
Council made a motion to “do all things necessary” to return to using water purchased from Detroit and 
discontinue use of the Flint River as a water source. The following statement from Emergency Manager Gerald 
Ambrose addresses that point: 

“Flint water today is safe by all EPA and MDEQ standards and the City is working daily to improve its quality. 
Users also pay some of the highest rates in the state because of the decreased numbers of users and the age of 
the system. 

“It is incomprehensible to me that 7 members of the Flint City Council would want to send more than $12 
million a year to the system serving southeast Michigan, even if Flint rate payers could afford it. Water from 
Detroit is no safer than water from Flint. 


l 



“If $12 million annually were available for discretionary use, it would be far better spent reducing rates paid by 
Flint customers and/or modernizing the City's system.” 


-Gerald Ambrose, 


Flint Emergency Manager 


-END- 


-Jason Lorenz 
Public Information Officer 
City of Flint 
(810) 237-2039 

1 1 o re n z @ c: i t vo ffl irst.com 


2 




(810) 237-2039 

For Immediate Release 

Emergency Manager Statement on Water: Spending Extra $12 Million 
on Detroit Water “Incomprehensible” When Flint Water Just as Safe 

Flint, Michigan- March 24, 2015- At the City Council meeting held on Monday, March 23, 
2015, Flint City Council made a motion to “do all things necessary” to return to using water 
purchased from Detroit and discontinue use of the Flint River as a water source. The 
following statement from Emergency Manager Gerald Ambrose addresses that point: 


“Flint water today is safe by all EPA and MDEQ standards and the City is working daily 
to improve its quality. Users also pay some of the highest rates in the state because of 
the decreased numbers of users and the age of the system. 

“It is incomprehensible to me that 7 members of the Flint City Council would want to send 
more than $12 million a year to the system serving southeast Michigan, even if Flint rate 
payers could afford it. Water from Detroit is no safer than water from Flint. 

“If $12 million annually were available for discretionary use, it would be far better spent 
reducing rates paid by Flint customers and/or modernizing the City's system.” 


-Gerald Ambrose, 

Flint Emergency Manager 

-END- 


City Hall 

1 101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 
810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7218 www.citvofflint.com 





TO; 

FROM;; 



Wayne Workman. Deputy Treasurer 
Treasury Department 
State of Michigan 


Jefty Enft^g <Sey Manager 

City s / 

/"/ 

March 3.4015 


Es^§^^.MscK^sj;€or#e.C%-,dfFlfia^ City goyernpicfit 

to felajioiai solvency,, and working to ;$mvm that the City move s: forward: on a financially 
sustainabie basis. The steps taken over the past fhteeyeaM have beers difficult. Taxes and fees have 
been raised, servicesand workforce redrseed, avid; ongoing costs, including legacy costs, have been 
constrained. 

Hie emtent controversy surrounding the provision of water, and the path for resolution, has a 
potentially significant impact: on the: progress that is being made. I am satisfied that the water 
provided So Flint users today is within all MDEQ and EPA guidelines, as evidenced by the most 
reeentWater quality results conducted for MDEQ. We have a continuing cpnimilment to maintain 
water safety and to improve water ;^svuce this eormtufment 

will he made, 

City should return to DWSD, even for a short period of time, 
Would,, in mv judgment, have extremely negative dmucial conseguenees to the water system, and 
consequently to the rate payers. By the most conservative estimates, such a move would increase 
costs by at least $12 millioxr annually, with that amount achieved only by eliminating virtually all 
budgeted imptpyemcm the system. For a system with Unrestricted Assets ofonly $740,745, 
according to the June 30, 2014 audited financial statements, the only recourse within ihevCity'S 
control would be to increase revenues significantly. And in my judgment, dial would come from 
raising i^ps.fof Water by:30$i or more , Further, clianging the source of the eity % water would 
not necessarily change any of the aesthetky vf the water, including odor add discoloration, since 
those appear to be directly related to the aging pipes and otiicr isiiTastructiue that camywater fi'om 
the treatment: facility to o ur customers. 


Clftl oI.MM; * llii.S, Sa|l:unW Btreet « 




.cent * 


7bM7b4b s Faxt 





Wayne Workman 
March 3, 2015 
Page 2 


This direction of discussion also deviates from what, in my judgment, should be the focus: How 
can we not only operate and maintain a system to assure the delivery of safe and quality water 
dependably, but significantly reduce the cost of water and sewer to the users? At an average of 
$149 per month for water and sewer service for a residential user, the cost is extremely high in 
comparison to surrounding areas, as well as most areas across the state, and creates a significant 
financial burden for many users. In my judgment, we should all be concentrating on how to reduce 
rates by 50% or more. Unfortunately, there are no easy or evident answers, and continuation of 
the status will be an impediment to the sustainable recovery of the City of Flint. It is a conversation 
that I expect we will have with the recently created Water Quality Advisory Committee. 

My reasoning for this conclusion is as follows: 

One of the decisions made in the context of beginning to eliminate deficits and to restore financial 
stability to the City of Flint was to increase water and sewer rates significantly - the only choice 
available to financially stabilize a system that as of June 30, 2012, had a deficit of $8,758,091. 
Another was to leave DWDS for the KWA because it offered the opportunity to lower future rate 
increases. A third decision was to utilize the Flint River on an interim basis when DWSD 
unilaterally terminated the City’s contract for water purchase. That decision was made because it 
also offered an immediate cost savings opportunity which translated into the ability to upgrade the 
Water Treatment Plant without having to seek financing. It was a reasonable decision because of 
our experience in using the river in a back-up capacity, including test runs on a quarterly basis for 
several decades. 

Unfortunately, the switch to the river as a primary source was more challenging than anticipated, 
and the harsh winter of 20 1 3-20 1 4 resulted in much more damage to the aging water infrastructure 
than in previous years. The result was the issuance of required notices that water exceeded 
established guidelines for safety as it could affect certain vulnerable populations, and some users 
of the system experienced unpleasant odors and discoloration. Some users also appeared to have 
had some negative reactions to the new source of water. However, as soon as the test results were 
known. City staff took immediate actions to address the concerns. These actions are evidenced 
today by the fact that MDEQ has certified that our most recent testing shows water from all testing 
sites to be well within acceptable guidelines. Additionally, the City is continuing to taking the 
necessary actions to assure that the water supply remains safe and that water quality continues to 
improve. 

As the City has moved to address the situation, the suggestion continues to be made that the City 
should re-engage with DWSD and purchase water at least until the KWA pipeline is supplying 
water. As evidenced by the most recent letter from DWSD, such a decision would immediately 
increase the City’s cost by $846,700 per month, or $10,160,400 per year, just for the fixed cost 
portion of the price. The actual purchase of water would be an additional fee, and dependent upon 



Wayne Workman 
March 3, 2015 
Page 3 


the quantity purchased. We estimate the actual water purchase cost to average more than $ 1 million 
per month, for a grand total of approximately $22 million per year. Finally, the DWSD offer is 
conditioned upon the City (or presumably the KWA) agreeing to negotiate a long term contract 
(30 years) for back-up. 

The $22 million annual estimate of increased costs to purchase water from DWSD would be 
minimally offset by an approximate $3 million in reduced operating costs, and could be further 
offset by an additional $9 million, but only if all funding for capital improvements to the system 
are eliminated. To eliminate all funding dedicated to repairing, stabilizing, and improving the 
system would be totally irresponsible and would have long term negative consequences to the City 
and to future rate payers. 


As you are aware we have recently brought in outside expert assistance to evaluate the steps we 
have taken to assure that the water is safe and to continue to improve water quality. We are 
expecting specific recommendations within the next few weeks, and are committed to 
implementing those recommendations in a timely manner. Many steps have already been taken. I 
am confident that implementing their recommendations will assure a continuing supply of safe 
water as well as improved quality, and at far less cost than re-engaging DWSD. 

We have also created a 40-member Water Advisory Committee and a 13-member Technical 
Advisory Committee to assure two-way communication with the public and users of the system. 
Those committees will begin to meet this week, and we look forward to answering their questions 
and receiving their input. 

It is unfortunate that problems and concerns with quality have arisen, and we are working every 
day to address the issues that caused them. Maintaining safe water and improving quality is a top 
priority as we work to make the City of Flint an attractive place to live, work, study, and play. 



From: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: 

Monday, April 27, 2015 5:44 PM 

To: 

Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Cc: 

Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Clement, Elizabeth (GO V); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Baird, 
Richard (GOV); Gelisse, Ashley (TREASURY); Storberg, Ann Marie (TREASURY); Koryzno, 
Edward (Treasury); Headen, Frederick (Treasury) 

Subject: 

Re: scanned doc 


Would someone please explain to me how cutting off water to 10,000 people does anything but bring the wrath of God 
down on all of us? 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Apr 27, 2015, at 10:29 AM, Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) <WorkiTianW@midtig3n.%Qv> wrote: 

We received this letter Friday the 24 ;h . Water shut-off threat continues. 


From: Dempkowski, Angela (Treasury) 
Sent: Monday, April 27, 2015 10:26 AM 
To: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 
Subject: scanned doc 


Angela Dempkowski | Senior Executive Management Assistant/Treasury 
State of Michigan j 430 W. Allegan Street, 1st Floor j Lansing, MI 48922 
<image001.jpg> (517) 373-0633 (fax) 

dempkowskia@michiqan.gov 



Think Greed Don’t print this e-mail unless you need to. 


CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: This e-mail, and any attachments, is for the sole use of the intended 
reciptent(s) and may contain information that is confidential and protected from disclosure under 
the law. Any unauthorized review, use, disclosure, or distribution is prohibited. If you are not the 
intended recipient, please contact the sender by reply e-mail, and delete/destroy all copies of the 
original message and attachments. 

Thank you 


<DWSD-HP letter. pdf> 


l 



From: Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, August 03, 2015 2:49 PM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Cc: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Subject: RE: dennis muchmore has sent you - Flint pastors tell residents to get their water 

tested - from Detroit News 


That AP brief came from this Flint Journal story: 

http://www.mlive.com/news/fiint/index.ssf/2015/08/concerned pastors urge flint r.btml#incart river 

Here's one that showcases the local clergy. I presume most of these folks will be with us tomorrow? 

http://www.miive.com/news/fiint/index.ssf/2015/06/iudge says flint doesnt have t l,htmi#incart related stories 

Just had a pre-meet with Stephen Busch, our drinking water expert who oversees the staff regulating Flint. He's planning 
to bring some information on the history of the water / lead issue in Flint, as well as some data about the most recent 
statutorily required testing. He'll be able to discuss the state program (which implements the federal statute), what 
we've been doing by way of testing, what we're finding, and what residents should do if they have concerns. 

Anything else anyone wants us to be prepared for? 
b 


Original Message 

From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, August 03, 2015 11:55 AM 

To: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Wurfel, Brad 
(DEQ); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Cc: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Subject: FW: dennis muchmore has sent you - Flint pastors tell residents to get their water tested - from Detroit News 
Here's part of our on-going problem. 

Original Message 

From: do-nof-reply@detroitnews.com f m ailto:do-not-repjy(g ) detroitnews.com1 

Sent: Monday, August 3, 2015 11:49 AM 
To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Subject: dennis muchmore has sent you - Flint pastors tell residents to get their water tested - from Detroit News 

Message from: muchrnoredgamichigan.gov 

Flint pastors tell residents to get their water tested 

Some area pastors held a rally Sunday to urge residents to get their tap water tested 
Check out this story on detroitnews.com: http:// detne. ws/lSAH 1K6 


l 




From: 

Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

Sent: 

Saturday, September 05, 2015 2:00 PM 

To: 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clayton, 
Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Flint Water Filters 


Factually accurate update; but how did it go over with the residents? 

Thanks 

Rick 

> On Sep 2, 2015, at 3:13 PM, Hollins, Harvey (GOV) <honinsh @ micbi g an. g ov> wrote: 

> 

> As you know, ^^^^^^^^^^donated 1500 kitchen water filters for Flint residents as a way of providing added 

comfort amid concerns about Flint's water quality. not want any publicity or credit for the 

donation. 

> 

> The filters were delivered to the Concerned Pastors organization, who held an event yesterday to give away the filters. 
Residents were invited to come to a central location to pick up their filter. The Concerned Pastors targeted low income 
Flint residents. 

> 

> More than 1500 households showed up yesterday to pick up a filter; the Concerned Pastors exhausted the donated 
supply in 4 hours with 200 people still waiting to get a filter. 

> 

> Best, 

> Harvey 


l 



From: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, September 15, 2015 9:52 AM 

To: 

Khouri, Nick (TREASURY); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); 
Lyon, Nick (DCH); Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Cc: 

Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV); Roberts, John (DTMB) 

Subject: 

Flint 


Nice of Dayne Walling to work with us before he called yesterday to tell me he was going to announce to City Council 
last night that Flint needs and deserves $30M from the state for upgrades to their water system and a lead abatement 
program. Any thoughts on this? 


l 




From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, September 15, 2015 9:57 AM 

To: Khouri, Nick (TREASURY); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); 

Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Roberts, John (DTMB) 

Cc: Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey 

(GOV) 

Subject: Follow up to previous email 


Flint asks Snyder for $30M to upgrade water system 


Water from the Flint River rushes into the Flint water treatment plant in Flint. (Photo: File photo) 


l 




1 CONNECTTWEETEINKEDXN 2 COMMI-M i:\iaii.mori: 

Flint — The mayor of Flint is asking Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder for $30 million to help upgrade the city’s 
water system and replace lead service pipes. 

The Flint Journal reports Mayor Dayne Walling announced his request while speaking Monday to the City 
Council. The request was made that day in a letter to Snyder. 

The funds sought by Walling include $10 million to replace lead service lines and plumbing that can leach lead 
into drinking water. Virginia Tech researchers testing Flint’s water have said residents shouldn’t drink or cook 
with city water without flushing lines or using a fdter. 

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency says Flint’s water is within levels allowed for lead. The agency has 
said it would help the city in its efforts to reduce lead. 


2 









From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 


Subject: 


Khouri, Nick (TREASURY) 

Tuesday, September 15, 2015 10:01 AM 
Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Wyant, 
Dan (DEQ); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, 
Harvey (GOV); Roberts, John (DTMB) 

Re: Flint 


Tom 

Any state or federal subsidized financing available? Something similar in structure to combined sewer overflow? 
It's not free money, but a better option 


Sent from my iPhone 

On Sep 15, 2015, at 9:52 AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored#michigan,go v> wrote: 

Nice of Dayne Walling to work with us before he called yesterday to tell me he was going to announce to 
City Council last night that Flint needs and deserves $30M from the state for upgrades to their water 
system and a lead abatement program. Any thoughts on this? 


l 



From: 

Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, September 15, 2015 10:27 AM 

To: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Cc: 

Khouri, Nick (TREASURY); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); 
Lyon, Nick (DCH); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); 
Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Roberts, John (DTMB) 

Subject: 

Re: Flint 


Caution that if Flint gets another allotment, we can expect every other large system in the state will be right on their 
heels. 15,000 homes in Flint is the estimate. That's a fraction of Detroit. ... 

Perhaps this is an opportunity for Mott Foundation? Just a thought, 
b 


Sent from my iPhone 


On Sep 15, 2015, at 9:52 AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored#michigan.go v> wrote: 


Nice of Dayne Walling to work with us before he called yesterday to tell me he was going to announce to 
City Council last night that Flint needs and deserves $30M from the state for upgrades to their water 
system and a lead abatement program. Any thoughts on this? 


l 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 


Subject: 

Attachments: 


Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) 

Tuesday, September 15, 2015 10:48 AM 
Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV); Roberts, John (DTMB); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Khouri, Nick 
(TREASURY); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Flint 

Fwd: PRESS RELEASE: Coalition for Clean Water Lawsuit Dismissed by Circuit Court 


Wayne & I have a call scheduled with the Mayor, City Atty, & the City Mgr @ 4:00 today. We are following up to see if 
in fact they inadvertently missed filing the appeal on the rate case, if so, in my mind that would be a huge, costly 
blunder (but that is why we are talking to them) which wili greatly exacerbate the financial condition/solvency of the 
system . 

And recall (not that long ago) I believe we gave them approx. $2mm in SRF loan relief and approx. $2mm in grant 
money[cgap?] to improve the system. 

We are having staff look at possible other assistance from a financing or loan perspective. My sense is there wili not be 
much there if any. 


p.s. - the Flint coalition lawsuit was dismissed (see attached) 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, September 15, 2015 9:52 AM 

To: Khouri, Nick (TREASURY) < KhounN@mk:higan.goy >; Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) < Sax t on T ;g> mich iff a n . gov >; 

Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) < Workrn3nW@michlgan.gov >; Lyon, Nick (DCH) < Lyon N 2 @ m i ch iga n .go v >; Wyant, Dan 

Cc: Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) < Wurfel B@middgan.gov >; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigan,gov >; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

< demeritg@michigari.gov >; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) < hoSiinsh@rniddaan.gov >; Roberts, John (DTMB) 


< Roberts J 9 @ m i c h iga n ,gov > 

Subject: Flint 


Nice of Dayne Walling to work with us before he called yesterday to tell me he was going to announce to City Council 
last night that Flint needs and deserves $30M from the state for upgrades to their water system and a lead abatement 
program. Any thoughts on this? 


l 



From: 

Sent: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Tuesday, September 15, 2015 9:58 AM 

Fwd: PRESS RELEASE: Coalition for Clean Water Lawsuit Dismissed by Circuit Court 
Coalition for Clean Water Lawsuit Dismissed 9.14.15.pdf; ATT00001.htm 


Sent from my iPad 
Begin forwarded message: 

From: Jason Lorenz <iiprenzi@ci ty offiittt.com> 

Date: September 15, 2015 at 9:37:25 AM EDT 
To: undisclosed-recipients:; 

Subject: PRESS RELEASE: Coalition for Clean Water Lawsuit Dismissed by Circuit 
Court 

For Immediate Release 


Lawsuit against City of Flint brought by Coalition for Clean Water Dismissed 

by Circuit Court 


Flint, Michigan - September 15, 2015 - The lawsuit brought against the City of Flint by the 
Coalition for Clean Water has been dismissed by Circuit Court Judge Archie Hayman. In his 
September 14 ruling, Judge Hayman determined that the plaintiff did not state a valid cause of 
action against the City of Flint, the Mayor and the City Administrator. Judge Hayman also 
determined that he did not have jurisdiction to provide the relief sought by the plaintiff. All 
counts of the Coalition’s amended complaint were therefore dismissed. 

The City of Flint has maintained communication with both the Michigan Department of 
Environmental Quality and the United States Environmental Protection Agency to ensure all 
proper safety and quality standards have been followed. The MDEQ recently notified Flint that it 
is no longer in violation of the Safe Water Drinking Act due to total trihalomethanes (TTHM) 
following four consecutive quarters of testing showing levels below the federal action level. The 
City of Flint will continue to work to ensure safe, quality and affordable drinking water to its 
residents, businesses and visitors. 


l 



The City of Flint will continue to provide updates on its water progress through its website, 
cityofflint.com . Anyone with water issues is encouraged to call 810-766-7202 so that they can be 
addressed. Residents wishing to receive a free and independent in-home water test can call 810- 
787-6537 or email fllntwater @ cit yo ffiint.com. 


-END- 


-Jason Lorenz 
Public Information Officer 
City of Flint 

(Office) 
(Cell) 

11orenz@dtyofflint.com 




2 




(810) 237-2039 

For Immediate Release 

Lawsuit against City of Flint brought by Coalition for Clean Water 

Dismissed by Circuit Court 

Flint, Michigan - September 15, 2015- The lawsuit brought against the City of Flint by the 
Coalition for Clean Water has been dismissed by Circuit Court Judge Archie Hayman. In 
his September 14 ruling, Judge Hayman determined that the plaintiff did not state a valid 
cause of action against the City of Flint, the Mayor and the City Administrator. Judge 
Hayman also determined that he did not have jurisdiction to provide the relief sought by 
the plaintiff. All counts of the Coalition’s amended complaint were therefore dismissed. 

The City of Flint has maintained communication with both the Michigan Department of 
Environmental Quality and the United States Environmental Protection Agency to ensure 
all proper safety and quality standards have been followed. The MDEQ recently notified 
Flint that it is no longer in violation of the Safe Water Drinking Act due to total 
trihalomethanes (TTHM) following four consecutive quarters of testing showing levels 
below the federal action level. The City of Flint will continue to work to ensure safe, quality 
and affordable drinking water to its residents, businesses and visitors. 

The City of Flint will continue to provide updates on its water progress through its website, 
cityofflint.com. Anyone with water issues is encouraged to call 810-766-7202 so that they 
can be addressed. Residents wishing to receive a free and independent in-home water 
test can call 810-787-6537 or email flintwater@citvoffSint.com . 


-END- 


City Hall 

1 101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 
810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7218 www.citvofflint.com 






From: 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, September 15, 2015 11:00 AM 

To: 

Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) 

Cc: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Khouri, Nick (TREASURY); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); 
Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Agen, Jarrod 
(GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Roberts, John (DTMB) 

Subject: 

Re: Flint 


On the one hand, this is an infrastructure challenge that is not unique. A number of cities in Michigan, maybe not as 
pronounced, are dealing with water and sewage infrastructure challenges. Flint's problem is that it has 500 miles of iron 
piping that's over 60 years old, coupled with the fact that the city's population is half the size than it was at it's peak. 

On the other hand, like roads, we need a broader state wide solution. Given the roads legislation, perhaps the solution 
is a fund that a city of a certain size or county can draw down with a required match that can be used to invest in roads, 
water or sewer. 

Of course, Flint's residents are tapped out in terms of rates, taxes and fees, but in the end, they are still a 
municipality. Any solution the state provides needs to be available to other cities, and should function to assist the city, 
not total pay for their problem. 


On Sep 15, 2015, at 10:26 AM, Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) < Wu r fei B @ir iic higan.go v> wrote: 

Caution that if Flint gets another allotment, we can expect every other large system in the state will be 
right on their heels. 15,000 homes in Flint is the estimate. That's a fraction of Detroit. ... 

Perhaps this is an opportunity for Mott Foundation? Just a thought, 
b 


Sent from my iPhone 

On Sep 15, 2015, at 9:52 AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < rnuchmoredi§Hy:tchigan.gav > wrote: 

Nice of Dayne Walling to work with us before he called yesterday to tell me he was 
going to announce to City Council last night that Flint needs and deserves $30M from 
the state for upgrades to their water system and a lead abatement program. Any 
thoughts on this? 


l 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 


Subject: 


Amen. 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Sep 15, 2015, at 11:00 AM, Hollins, Harvey (GOV) <hoil in sh @ rnichifi3n.gov> wrote: 

On the one hand, this is an infrastructure challenge that is not unique. A number of cities in Michigan, 
maybe not as pronounced, are dealing with water and sewage infrastructure challenges. Flint's problem 
is that it has 500 miles of iron piping that's over 60 years old, coupled with the fact that the city's 
population is half the size than it was at it's peak. 

On the other hand, like roads, we need a broader state wide solution. Given the roads legislation, 
perhaps the solution is a fund that a city of a certain size or county can draw down with a required 
match that can be used to invest in roads, water or sewer. 

Of course, Flint's residents are tapped out in terms of rates, taxes and fees, but in the end, they are still 
a municipality. Any solution the state provides needs to be available to other cities, and should function 
to assist the city, not total pay for their problem. 


Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) 

Tuesday, September 15, 2015 11:05 AM 
Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Khouri, Nick (TREASURY); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); 
Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Agen, Jarrod 
(GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Roberts, John (DTMB) 

Re: Flint 


On Sep 15, 2015, at 10:26 AM, Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) < WurfeiB@stijChisan.gov > wrote: 

Caution that if Flint gets another allotment, we can expect every other large system in 
the state will be right on their heels. 15,000 homes in Flint is the estimate. That's a 
fraction of Detroit. ... 

Perhaps this is an opportunity for Mott Foundation? Just a thought, 
b 


Sent from my iPhone 

On Sep 15, 2015, at 9:52 AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@sTiichig3n.gov > 
wrote: 


Nice of Dayne Walling to work with us before he called yesterday to tell 
me he was going to announce to City Council last night that Flint needs 


l 



and deserves $30M from the state for upgrades to their water system 
and a lead abatement program. Any thoughts on this? 


2 



From: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: 

Wednesday, September 16, 2015 10:33 AM 

To: 

Khouri, Nick (TREASURY) 

Cc: 

Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Wyant, 
Dan (DEQ); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, 
Harvey (GOV); Roberts, John (DTMB) 

Subject: 

RE: Flint 


Any additional information on this? 


From: Khouri, Nick (TREASURY) 

Sent: Tuesday, September 15, 2015 10:01 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@midtiff3P, gov > 

Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) <S3xtonT@michigan.gov>; Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) < Workm a n Wfg> m i ch iga n ,gov>; 
Lyon, Nick (DCH) <l.yr}nN 2@midiig3n.gov>; Wyant, Dan (DEQ) < Wy a n t D © m i ch i ga n . gov> ; Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) 

< Wu rfe j B fg) m i ch i ga n . goy> ; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Age nJ @ m I ch iga n ,g ov >; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

<demente@imlchig3n.gov>; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) < holiinsh@mic higan.gov>; Roberts, John (DTMB) 
<RohertfJ9@imichig3n.gov> 

Subject: Re: Flint 


Tom 

Any state or federal subsidized financing available? Something similar in structure to combined sewer overflow? 
It's not free money, but a better option 


Sent from my iPhone 

On Sep 15, 2015, at 9:52 AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchtmofed@michi.gan.gov > wrote: 

Nice of Dayne Walling to work with us before he called yesterday to tell me he was going to announce to 
City Council last night that Flint needs and deserves $30M from the state for upgrades to their water 
system and a lead abatement program. Any thoughts on this? 


l 



From: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Sent: Wednesday, September 16, 2015 10:40 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Khouri, Nick (TREASURY) 

Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Roberts, John 
(DTMB) 

Subject: RE: Flint 


We will have an update later today from our call with the City yesterday. 


Wayne L. Workman 
Deputy State Treasurer 
Michigan Department of Treasury 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, September 16, 2015 10:33 AM 
To: Khouri, Nick (TREASURY) <K hour i N@rnichiRan ,goy> 

Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) <5axfonT@michlgan.gov>; Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) < Workm a n W@ m i ch Iga n .gov>; 
Lyon, Nick (DCH) < Lyon N 2 @ m i ch i ga n.gov>; Wyant, Dan (DEQ) <WyantD@michigan.gov>; Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) 

< W u rf e 1 B @ m i c h i ga n . g o v> ; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <Age oJ@mlebi g <mgoy >; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
<demente@rnlchigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) < hoiiins h @michifian .gov>; Roberts, John (DTMB) 
<Robert s j9 @rnjchigan.goy > 

Subject: RE: Flint 


Any additional information on this? 


From: Khouri, Nick (TREASURY) 

Sent: Tuesday, September 15, 2015 10:01 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <m uch more d@mi c higan,gov > 

Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) <5axfonT@michlgan.gov>; Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) < Workm a n W@ m i ch Iga n .gov>; 
Lyon, Nick (DCH) <Lyon hi 2 @ m i diigan.gov>; Wyant, Dan (DEQ) <WyantD@michigan.gov>; Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) 
<V¥urfelBfg>michigan.goy>; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Agen.;@mlchigan,gov >; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
<demente@rnlchigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) < hoilinsh@michigan .goy>; Roberts, John (DTMB) 

< Roberts j 9 @ rn i ch iga n ,gov> 

Subject: Re: Flint 


Tom 

Any state or federal subsidized financing available? Something similar in structure to combined sewer overflow? 
It's not free money, but a better option 


Sent from my iPhone 


l 



On Sep 15, 2015, at 9:52 AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < rn yeh r n orad @ m i eh iga n . gov > wrote: 

Nice of Dayne Walling to work with us before he called yesterday to tell me he was going to announce to 
City Council last night that Flint needs and deserves $30M from the state for upgrades to their water 
system and a lead abatement program. Any thoughts on this? 


2 



Murray, David (GOV) 

Monday, September 28, 2015 5:51 PM 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Fwd: Flint Water Issue - Rep. Kildee Letter Received By Federal Agencies 
image003.png; ATT00001.htm; 09-22-15 Kildee Requesting Temporary Assistance for 
Lead in Flint Water.pdf; ATT00002.htm; Flint Pediatric Lead Concerns REVISED.PDF; 
ATT00003.htm 


I don't know if Kildee mentioned this to the governor. 
Sent from my iPhone 


Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Kelenske, Chris (MSP)" < KelenskeC@michigan.gov > 

Date: September 28, 2015 at 5:48:41 PM EDT 

To: "Etue, Kriste (MSP)" < EtueK@michigan.gov >, "Gorski, Gary (MSP)" < GorskiG@mlchigan.gov >. 

"Smith, Paul (GOV)" < SrriithP29@rnichigan.gov > 

Cc: "Katarsky, Anthony (MSP)" < KatafskyA@rnichigan.gov >, "Leix, Ron (MSP)" < LeixK@michigan.gov >. 
"Banner, Shanon (MSP)" < BannerS@rnichigan.gov >. "Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" < Wurfels@michigart.gov >, 
"Murray, David (GOV)" < MurrayDl@rnichigan.gov > 

Subject: Flint Water Issue - Rep. Kildee Letter Received By Federal Agencies 

Attached are two documents for your information: 1) A letter from US Representative Kildee to Craig 
Fugate of FEMA, HHS, EPA, and CDC and 2) a PowerPoint on Flint water concerns. Essentially, 
Representative Kildee is requesting FEMA take action to resolve potable water quality issues associated 
with the Flint water system. 

This is the first we heard of the letter and I actually found out from the FEMA Region V Director when he 
called me about an hour ago. He and I discussed a few things on this and he will respond advising they 
need to work through the local EM system in Ml (engaging the local EM and then EMHSD). They also are 
working through the local health department as I confirmed with Dr. Scott from DHHS. If Flint needs 
water or want water the first step is to handle it locally (at least on the EM side and then push up any 
gaps they cannot fill to us). We are not aware of any work the local EM has done in this regard. I will be 
with the FEMA Region V Director as well as the FEMA Administrator, Craig Fugate, this week if they have 
questions. 

I have advised Dr. Jackie Scott from DHHS and will be sending her the letter and ppt. 


Capt. Chris A. Kelenske 

Deputy State Director/Commander 

Emergency Management and Homeland Security Division 

Michigan State Police 

4000 Collins Road 

Lansing, Ml 48910 


l 



( 517 ) 333-5042 


"A PROUD tradition of SERVICE through EXCELLENCE, INTEGRITY, and COURTESY." 


2 






WiSHSNQTOM CJFrce 


Stii Dbtbjgt, UiSHxMf'J 


COSSM8TTES ON 

HfiANCSM. ssavices 


Suacoianitrree oh 
Housing «« (hsurjm«;e 



22? CwfHSii House Omcg Sumwa 
WASKSWTtei, DC 20S15 
;ss2j ggs-ssu 
(303} 235-S3S8 (Fax) 

BKTESCT OtW-S 


Subcommittee cm 
Mcmsxw Psycv m® Tfwas 

SSKKX! WHS? 

DgMSSSWffi POLICY SHO 
CcmMUNtc/CTKiNS Committee: 


ffimtgress of tyt Putted jitate 

praiss of prpregeitttiihrs 
pfegllTOgtan, ^CE 20515 


til East Ccwr Sraeer #38 
FUW, M! *10502 
(610} S38-S62? 

(810} £38-86§S (Fax; 


wwwow-t&nBc.HSjag.sw 


} /HspDANKaogs 


September 22, 2015 


Secretary Sylvia Matthews Burwell 

U.S> Department of Health & Human Services 

HHS Office of the -Secretary 



Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of the Administrator 1 1 0 1 A 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 


Administrator William Craig Fugate 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street, S.W. 

Washington, DC 20472 


Director Tom Frieden 

Centers tor Disease Control and Prevention 

1600 Clifton Road 

Atlanta, GA 30329 


Secretary Burwell, Administrator McCarthy, Administrator Fugate and Director Frieden; 

Recent developments regarding the level of lead in the water in one of the communities I 
represent, Flint, Mich,, have raised significant concerns about the safety of its drinking water. 
For this reason, 1 am requesting immediate resources to provide safe drinking water to the 
residents of Flint until additional testing can be completed that confirms the water is safe, 


conducted tests and taken the position that the lead level in the water is safe and below the action 


of Virginia Tech University, an established drinking water expert, conducted his own tests as 
part of a study that determined the water in Flint was above the lead action level. 

Additionally, yesterday the Greater Flint Health Coalition, a group of health professionals in the 
community, released a report showing elevated blood lead levels in residents in Flint, 
particularly in young children. In response, the Coalition has requested that the Genesee County 
Health Department release a health advisory indicating that the water in Flint is unsafe to drink. 


Thus, I am requesting resources from your agency to provide dean drinking water to the 
residents of Flint until additional testing can determine when the water will he safe to drink and a 
long-term solution can be implemented. 

This is a serious health issue, particularly for young children, aid until the water is demonstrated 
to be safe, immediate action must be taken to ensure Flint’s residents have potable drinking 
water. 

1 look forward to working with you and thank you for your immediate attention. 


Sincerely, 



MEMBER OF CONGRESS 



Pediatric Lead Exposure In 

Flint, Michigan: 

A Failure of Primary Prevention 


Mrrnss U'^nns MH MPU CA4P 

IViOlleS ndUira Milos sd ;¥i Li iVSf si rnn? 

b- fc i b V' V W* b i J > U > V^r J > n) b > W -s5 ROb 

l\/s irh io':s n Cfntp ^ n rfr^ £& nt' csf' PAr!i?ifTir"«i smri Mnman 

f « b fVt b b b 5 bv^w Vv> 5 si v bw. si .\S > Vv ^.v' Oi v5 i i V' si 5 5u V * b V' b ^ S * W ^ <Ub j b \<-b j 5: \4 b si $ b 5 



Introducing Makayla* 


• 12 month old girl (DOB 8/15/2014) presented last 
week for her 1 year old check up. No concerns. 

• Lives with single mom and 2 older siblings in west 
side (48504). Formula from WIC; powder mixed with 
warm tap water. 

• Physical exam and development are normal. Makayla 
receives her 1 year old vaccines and routine lead and 
hemoglobin screening. 

• A couple days later, lead level comes back as 6 ug/dL. 



^Hypothetical scenario 


Blood lead level of 6 ug/dL... 


Blood lead levels (BLL) above 5 ug/dL are considered 
elevated blood lead levels (EBL) 

Just a few years ago (2012), 10 ug/dL was cutoff 

Increasing evidence shows NO safe blood lead level 

Disproportionately impacts low income, minority 
children 

Primary prevention is most important 



Primary Prevention 


• "Because no measurable level of blood lead is 
known to be without deleterious effects, and 
because once engendered, the effects appear 
to be irreversible in the absence of any other 
interventions, public health, environmental 
and housing policies should encourage 
PREVENTION of all exposure to lead " 


"Low Level Lead Exposure Harms Children: A Renewed Call for Primary Prevention " 2012 
CDC Advisory Committee on Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention. 



What will happen to Makayla? 


• Vast evidence supports increased likelihood of: 

- Decrease in IQ 

• An increase in BLL from 1 to 4 ug/dL, drops mean IQ -3.7 points 

- Small change in mean IQ, shifts entire population IQ 
distribution 

• Reduces high achievers IQs (>130) and increases kids with low IQs 
(<70) 

• Implications for special education services, employment, 
incarceration, life achievement, etc 


Lanphear BP et al.. Low-level environmental lead exposure and children's intellectual function: an international 
pooled analysis. Environ Health Perspect, 2005. 113:894-9. 

Fewtrell U, Pruss-Ustun A, Landrigan P, and Ayuso-Mateos JL, Estimating the global burden of disease of mild mental 
retardation and cardiovascular diseases from environmental lead 
exposure. Environmental Research, 2004. 94:120-33. 



Behavioral Burden 


Increased likelihood of : 

— ADHD behaviors 

— Delinquent behaviors and arrests 

— Total arrests and increased rates of arrests 
involving violent offenses 

— Other health effects: hematologic, cardiovascular, 
immunologic, endocrine, etc 


Wright, JP, KN Dietrich, MD Ris, et al. 2008. Association of prenatal and childhood blood lead concentrations with criminal arrests in early 
adulthood. PLoS Med 5(5): elOl 

Chen, A, B Cai, KN Dietrich, et al. 2007. Lead exposure, IQ, and behavior in urban 5-7 year-olds: Does lead affect behavior only by lowering IQ? 
Pediatrics 119(3): e650-e658. 

Needleman, HL, C McFarland, RB Ness, et al. 2002. Bone lead levels in adjudicated delinquents: A case control study. Neurotoxicology and 
Teratology 24(6):711-717. 



The Cost 


"For childhood lead poisoning, $5.9 million in medical care costs, as well 
as an additional $50.9 billion (sensitivity analysis: $44.8-$60.6 billion) in 
lost economic productivity resulting from reduced cognitive potential from 
preventable childhood lead exposure." 


"The present value of Michigan's economic losses attributable to lead 
exposure in the 2009 cohort of 5 year-olds ranges from $3.19 (using U.S. 
blood lead levels) to $4.85 billion (using Michigan blood lead levels) per 
year in loss of future lifetime earnings." 


Leonardo Trasande and Yinghua Liu. Reducing The Staggering Costs Of Environmental Disease In 
Children, Estimated At $76.6 Billion In 2008. Health Affairs, 30, no. 5 (2011):863-870 

The Price of Pollution: Cost Estimates of Environment-Related Childhood Diseases in Michigan. 2010 
Report by Michigan Network of Children's Environmental Health 



Lead in Water 


• Increasing as source of lead, because of success in controlling 
other sources. 

• Increasing due to aging water infrastructures, change in water 
sources, disinfectant uses, etc 

• Disproportionally impacts developmentally-vulnerable 
formula-fed infants and pregnant mothers 

— For about 25% o f infants drinking formula made from tap water at 10 
ppb, blood lead would rise above the CDC level of concern of 5 
micrograms/deciLiter (or ug/dL). 

- Increase in fetal death and reduced birth weights 


Triantafyllidou, S., Gallagher. D. and Edwards, M. Assessing risk with increasingly stringent public health goals: the case of water lead and blood 
lead in children. Journal of Water and Health, doi: 10.2166/wh. 2013. 067 58-68 (2014). 

Edwards, M. Fetal Death and Reduced Birth Rates Associated with Exposure to Lead-Contaminated Drinking Water. Env. Sci. and Tech. 2013 DOI: 
10.1021/es4034952 



Preliminary Results 



Conclusions from BLL analysis 


% of children with EBL in Flint has increased 

— Most striking increase in zip codes with highest water 
lead levels 

Results underestimate risk: infants not screened 
for lead and water usage unknown. 

— Accurate exposure largely unknown since national 
childhood lead screening focuses on household lead 
exposure (paint, soil, dust) at later ages (1 and 2 yrs) 


Results are consistent and concerning. Primary 
prevention has failed. 



Next Steps 


Immediately limit further exposure 

— Encourage breast feeding 

— No tap water for high risk groups: infants on formula & 
pregnant mothers 

— Declare health advisory: allows WIC to administer water or 
ready-to-feed formula and other resources (Salvation Army 
& United Way water supplies) 

— Distribution of lead clearing NSF-approved filters 

— Public education regarding precautions (flushing, etc) 

— Re-connect to Lake Huron water source ASAP 



And Makayla 


Asymptomatic now 

But what will her future hold 
and an entire generation of 
Flint children? 



From: 

Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: 

Thursday, October 01, 2015 12:01 PM 

To: 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Cc: 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Subject: 

RE: Flint 


I thought the answer was yes, but now not so sure. We should know by late afternoon. 

Original Message 

From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 01, 2015 10:47 AM 
To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfeis@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) < demente@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Re: Flint 

Question from the G: 

Can we definitively say that no WATER tests have ever shown levels that are above the Federal/EPA standards? 

I think Dan alluded to this in the meeting when he said we were testing at 11 and the federal mark is 15 or above. But 
Gov wants to know if we can make the claim above. 


> On Oct 1, 2015, at 9:06 AM, Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfeis@michigan.gov > wrote: 

> 

> Not yet, but hopefully will be. Think got Dennis and Flarvey on same page about tying in other FIHS/Hurley news to part 
of action plan on Friday's announcement. DEQand DEI FIS teams trying to finalize policy and messaging drafts now for 
review. 1:30 p.m. mtg to walk through details and see where at. 

> 

> Also - heads up and FYI - we just had a major protocol and near security breach with WJRTTV 12 getting up to 2nd floor 
without our knowledge or escort. Apparently DK Security and other EO team though they were part of pastors meeting 
happening. (Apparently invited by the pastors). That's caused some excitement have been dealing with. They're on our 
comms floor now - doing a stand up with them and letting them catch pastors after meeting outside. 

> 

> Original Message 

> From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

> Sent: Thursday, October 01, 2015 9:46 AM 

> To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfels@rnichigan.gov >; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) < dem6nte@micbigan.gov > 

> Subject: Flint 

> 

> Are we good on plan to discuss lead levels tomorrow? 

> If you need me to chime in, let me know.... 

> 

> If you have any messaging that you want G to review on the plane, just shoot it over. 

> 

> 


l 



From: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: 

Friday, October 02, 2015 9:43 AM 

To: 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Cc: 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Flint 

Yes 



Sent from my iPhone 

On Oct 1, 2015, at 7:02 PM, Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigan.gev > wrote: 

I don't want to just forward this email to Wyant, but Governor just ask to make sure that he had all this 
info. 

Does Dan have all this? 


Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" <muchmor^ 

Date: October 1, 2015 at 1:30:40 PM PDT 
To: "Snyder, Rick (GOV)" 

Cc: "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < Agen.?(S>mi c hjgan.go v>. "Posthumus, Dick (GOV)" 

< .P. f 2 ^ t h .u. m i j s d mi c b.U>.^ .0 .i?.s2.V' > / "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" < cAfr.f'2 « J fi t f rl ^ :.T'. ( f?b / 

"Hollins, Harvey (GOV)" < LU. 0 

Subject: Flint 

I talked with Dayne Walling at length today a few minutes ago, and Harvey and I had 
separate meetings with one of the Flint minister groups and then Rep. Neely. Our 
conversations were cordial for the most with the normal concerns being expressed. I 
told Rep. Neely that I felt he hadn't gotten enough respect and insight into our thoughts 
on this and we expanded our backgrounder for him and he was very appreciative. He 
actually cancelled a Black Caucus meeting called for today on this due to Harvey and our 
meeting. I have Dan and Nick calling him just to update. 

More importantly, we have the proposal back from DWSD for a reconnect: 

1. Short term reconnect is ok until KWA starts operating; 

2. No reconnect fee and immediate reconnect; 

3. Expenses incurred at actual cost although no estimate at this time 

4. A fixed monthly rate of $662,100 + a commodity rate of $8.93mcf for current 
15-16 FY; 

5. Rate is over and above water sales to Genesee County Drain Commission; 

6. A water wholesale adjustment; 

7. Only extends to Flint; 

8. Rates for 16-17 FY would be the same as other customers. 


l 



Mayor Duggan is more than willing to lend his support. 


I'm asking Saxton for a ballpark calculation. We would have to find them the money for 
this reconnect, but Dayne is more than open (as is Ananich to a lesser degree) to finding 
some revolving fund that they would repay perhaps on an extended basis or maybe 
using some guarantee to reduce the borrowing costs. 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Monday, October 05, 2015 2:55 PM 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
Document re Flint 
20151005142352484.pdf 


Dennis asked me to send you this document. 


l 



PiiLC-etvxA 

V \ vrvV CccJ v^iV 


COMMENTARY: MDEQ Mistakes and 


Deception Created the 


*~'int Wateii Crisis 


September 30, 201 5 Articles 



As results of our collaborative research with Flint 
re sidents exposed widespread problems with elevated levels of 
lead in Flint’s water, the Michigan Department ofEnvironmenta f 
iQualif^ (MDEQ) repeatedly attempted to discredit our findings 
and downplay the public health threat. For example, MDEQ’s 
Communications Director Brad Wurfel wrote to The Flint 
Journal’s Ronald Fonger: 


“...the state DEQ is just as perplexed by Edwards* 
results as he seems to he hy the City’s test results . 
When I said we were unsure how the Virginia Tech 


surprised that they got them. ... this group specializes 


surprised when the rabbit conies out of the hat , even if 
they can’t figure out how it is done..... while the state 


some quick testing could be seen as fanning political 
flames irresponsibly . Residents of Flint concerned 
about the health of their community don’t need more of 
that . ” 


Now that Dr. Mona Hanna- Attisha and Hurley Medical Center 
researchers have revealed that the rising leve l s of lead in Hint 
iw&te fi have been associated with increased blood lead of Flint’s 


children , our early health advice has been vindicated by most 
accounts. But MDEQ still dismisses the water controversy as 
“near~hvsteria,” and characterizes the Hurley study conclusions 
as “ unfortunate n if not quite “irresponsible. ” 


Given MDEQ’s insistence that there is absolutely nothing wrong 
with Bill wateij, we have created a timeline that illustrates how 
MDEQ’s mistakes and deception created the Biilt Waterj Crisis in 
the first place. Our analysis relies on e-mails and documents 
obtained through Freedom of Information Act (EOIA) requests 
by the American Civil Liberties Union-Michigan (ACLUl of 
Michigan) and FlintWaterStudy.org. 


All |J|Jf| documents are provided at the end of this article for 
review. 


Phase 1. MDEQ Fails to Require Corrosion Control 
for Flint River Water (April 2014) 

Effective July 1998, the federal Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) has 
required that all large public water systems maintain a program 
to control levels of lead in drinking water from corrosion. 
Moreover, the law also requires the City of Flint to have a state 
approved plan, with enforceable regulatory limits for “Water 
Quality Parameters” including pH, alkalinity and/or corrosion 
inhibitor dose measured in the water distribution system. 

MDEQ never required Flint to have a corrosion control program, 
nor did it set water quality parameters for the new Flint River 
source water. While M D EQ asserts that they are acting 
proactively to get a corrosion control program in Flint, there is 


no provision in the LCR that allows for corrosion control to ever 
be interrupted. 

As a direct result of this mistake, Flint residents have been 
completely unprotected from elevated lead in water from the 
moment the switch to Flint River water was made. This has 
created a conflict of interest for MDEQ ever since. Specifically, 
MDEQ’s failure to require a corrosion control program is what 
created the Flint water crisis in the first place-they now have a 
vested interest in covering up the problem. 

Phase 2. MDEQ misinforms the USEPA about 
Flint’s Corrosion Control (February-March 2015) 

Even if we assume MDEQ was confused about its obligations 
under the LCR, when problems with high lead started to crop up 
in February 2015, they should have quickly acted to correct the 
mistake. Samples with high lead were reported at t h e University 
of M ichigan-Flint Campus , and on February 26, 2015 Mike 
Glasgow (City of Flint) did excellent detective work discovering 
high lead (over too ppb) in water samples from Flint resident 
Lee-Anne Walters’ home. 

Ms. Walters immediately forwarded her results to 
representatives of USEPA Region 5, who in turn immediately 
forwarded the results to Stephen Busch and Mike Prysby 
(MDEQ) with the subject line “HIGH LEAD 2 ElJlSIl 
Water* testing Results” The EPA e-mail correctly informed 
MDEQ that Ms. Walters’ high lead was likely due to "... the 
different chemistry water. ..leaching out contaminants 
from the insides of... the pipes UT>ut MDEQ denied to EPA 
that that Flint had a lead in water problem. 



At that point, EPA Region 5 lead-in-water expert Miguel Del 
Toral asked MDEQ a question through another EPA employee: 

" 'Miguel was wondering if Flint is feeding Phosphates. 
Flint must have Optimal Corrosion Control Treatment- 
is it Phosphates ?" 


On February 27 th , 2015, MDEQ’s Stephen Busch unequivocally 
and falsely responded to EPA that: 

“The City of Flint. ..Has an Optimized Corrosion 
Control Program <and> Conducts quarterly Water 
Quality Parameter monitoring at 25 sites and has not 
had any unusual results. ” 

Reassured by MDEQ’s false statement, Del Toral ended USEPA’s 
February conversation with MDEQ by stating: 

“If I remember correctly , Detroit is feeding P04for the 
LCR , but since Flint is no longer part of that 
interconnection , I was wondering what their <Optimal 
Corrosion Control> was . They are required to have 
<Optimal Corrosion Control> in place which is why I 
ivas asking what they were using.” 

On March 18, 2015, Lee-Anne Walters’ home was retested after 
flushing her system thoroughly. This time the test result came 
back even worse with 397 ppb lead- almost 40 times higher than 
the World Health Organization 10 ppb safety threshold. EPA 
Region 5 forwarded the results to MDEQ, with a query “Any 
thoughts on how to respond to her? Pm running out of 



MDEQ’s response, delivered in a voicemail to Del Toral on 
March 19, 2015, stated that MDEQ had investigated and 
found Ms . Walters’ high lead was due to lead sources 
in her plumbing. On March 27, 2015, Walters' son, who had 
been having health problems, was tested for lead in his blood. 
The blood lead results came back high- well over the 5 ug/dL 
CDC threshold of concern. 

Phase 3. Walters and Del Toral Investigate the 
Veracity of MDEQ Statements (April to June 2015) 

With good reason, Lee-Anne Walters did not accept the MDEQ’s 
explanation to Del Toral for the high lead in her water. The 
internal plumbing had been stolen from the house before it was 
purchased, and they had installed new (lead free) plastic 
plumbing before moving in. 

Walters also checked up on the MDEQ statement that Flint had 
“an Optimized Corrosion Control Program." She called the City 
of Flint, and city officials correctly informed her that there was 
no program at all. 

Walters then passed this alarming information along to EPA’s 
Del Toral, who on April 23^ e-mailed MDEQ, and again asked 
what corrosion control program Flint was using. It was only then 
that MDEQ finally acknowledged that there was NO program. 
Concerned due to the very high occurrence of lead service lines 
(LSLs) in Flint, on April 27 th Del Toral wrote an EPA Region 5 
internal e-mail stating: 


“ Flint has not been operating any corrosion control 
treatment , which is very concerning given the 
likelihood ofLSLs in the City.” 


That night Del Toral also stopped at Walters’ house on a trip 
north, and personally inspected her plumbing first hand. He 
confirmed it was plastic and lead-free. Del Toral also dropped off 
sample bottles at the Walters’ home, and told her that if she 
wanted an analysis to contact Professor Marc Edwards (the 
author of this article and Principal Investigator of 
FlintWaterStudy.org) at Virginia Tech. 

The next morning Edwards talked Walters through an intensive 
30 bottle sampling protocol. When the bottles were returned to 
Virginia Tech and analyzed, Edwards and his senior research 
scientist Dr. Jeff Parks were stunned by the results . The average 
lead in was 2,429 ppb lead, the high was 13,200 ppb, and even 
after 25 minutes flushing the water never dropped below 200 
ppb. After Walters told Del Toral about the high lead results, he 
drove back to Flint, just in time to observe the City replacing the 
service line to Walters’ home. He personally collected a sample of 
the pipe and verified it to be pure lead. 

In a follow-up memo da t ed June 24. 2015 , which was sent to 
both Walters and Edwards, Del Toral outlined numerous 
concerns about the situation regarding the serious lead corrosion 
problem in Flint. He included a clear recommendation that the 
USEPA investigate whether the City of Flint was in compliance 
with federal laws for lead corrosion control. 


Phase 4. MDEQ “Handles” the LCR Report, ACLU|- 
Michigan, Virginia Tech and Miguel Del Toral (July 
to August 2015) 

> “Revising” the Original LCR Repor t, In spite of all the 
problems documented with lead in Flint flfiteij from February to 
June 2015, Flint and MDEQ took a lackadaisical approach to the 
federally required LCR sampling program. Specifically, just 5 
days before the June 30 th deadline to collect the 100 samples that 
MDEQ required, the City had only collected 39 samples. 

Adam Rosenthal (MDEQ) e-mailed Mike Glasgow at the City of 
Flint: 

“We hope you have 61 more lead/copper samples 
collected and sent to the lab by 6/30/15 , and that they 
will be below the AL for lead , As ofnoiu with 39 results , 
Flint's go* 11 percentile is over the AL for lead.” 

In the next five days the City collected 30 samples, all of which 
were below the action level, and did not reach the 100 sample 
target. If all 71 submitted samples had been considered valid, the 
City would have exceeded the 15 ppb action level. Federal law 
would then require that Flint residents be provided information 
about how to protect themselves and their children from lead in 
water. MDEQ’s failure to install corrosion control would have 
been flagged as an obvious mistake. But none of that happened. 

Instead, the MDEQ “revised” the City's original LCR report, 
invalidating two high lead results, so that the 90%’ile was under 
the 15 ppb action level. The validity of samples showing low lead 
in the City’s sampling was never questioned. This is a problem, 


because the City has now admitted that they do not know which 
homes had lead pip e, even though it is stated in writing in the 
report that all sampled homes had lead pipe. By law, at least 50 
percent of the homes sampled must be verified to have lead pipe, 
and the remainder of homes sampled must have been built 
before 1986 and known to have lead solder. There is no basis for 
believing that this requirement was met in either the 2014 or 
2015 LCR sampling events conducted by the City. Hence, the City 
of Flint has not had a valid LCR sampling event since the switch 
to Flint River water. 

MDEQ then lowered the minimum number of required samples 
from 100 to 60, making it look like the City of Flint had met the 
target. MDEQ also did not question the City’s open 
acknowledgement that homes from 2014 had not been re- 
sampled, or that high risk (Tier 1) sites were not used. 

The original report , due July 10 th , was also late by several weeks. 
All of these violations of federal law were glossed over, to make it 
appear that the City had passed its lead testing with flying colors. 
Just like that, according to MDEQ at least, the City of Flint had 
no LCR violations at all. 

> jli M |-Michigan [Bi ll . The timing by which the “revised” 
LCR report was created, is also of interest. On July 22, 2015, 
the ^p@i-Michigan submitted a FOlAj to MDEQ, requesting the 
City of Flint’s LCR report supposedly due on July 10, 2015. The 
City’s original LCR report with all the obvious problems is dated 
July 28, 2015. MDEQ never provided the ^C SB-Michigan with 
the original LCR report. Instead, they created the scrubbed 
revised report, on August 20, 2015, and sent that report to 
ALCU-Michigan (from the City of Flint) the next day. In the 




comments section of the report, Flint openly states “ Revised 
report after conference call with DEQ staff. Two 
samples ivcrc removed from list for not meeting 


samples was reduced to 60/’ 


> MDEQ to FlintWaterStudy.org What 

conference call? On September 9, 2015, Virginia Tech 
submitted a FOIA| to MDEQ explicitly requesting records and 
minutes of the conference call between DEQ staff and Flint cited 
in the revised LCR report. This PiM request has been denied by 
MDEQ, because " Your request does not include the 
date/ time of the conference call and who from the 


the conference call. ” FlintWaterStudy.org immediately 
appealed the withholding of documents related to the conference 
call to the State of Michigan. On September 28 th , our appeal was 
denied. We may commence a civil action if we do not agree with 
the decision. 


> Handling Miguel Del Toral. MDEQ obviously had a major 
problem on its hands with EPA’s lead-in-water expert Miguel Del 
Toral. On August 4 th 2015, Lee- Anne Walters and Melissa Mays 
met with MDEQ officials to discuss Flint’s lead in water 
problems. The MDEQ officials participating in the meeting were 
identified by Mays and Walters, as Liane Shekter-Smith (Chief of 
the Office of Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance), Stephen 
Busch and Brad Wurfel. 


According to Walters and Mays, Shekter-Smith bragged 
that “Mr. Del Toral has been handled/’ and that Flint 
residents would not be hearing from him again. Moreover, 


MDEQ asserted that Mr. Del Torahs interim memo detailing the 
many problems with Flint’s (non-existent) corrosion control 
program “ would never be finalized, ” Just yesterday, NPR 
released a slightly different , but enlightening version of Wurfel’s 
take on Del Toral and the memo: 

MDEQ spokesman Brad Wurfel says the report mas the 
work of a “rogue employee,” and promised the final 
report — not yet released — would tell a much different 
story . 


Mays and Walters vividly recall Wurfel, smirking or laughing, 
whenever they expressed concern about elevated lead in Flint’s 
water. Looking back on the exchange yesterday, Mays stated “It 


Flint’s children . 99 

Angered, Lee-Anne Walters then called Edwards, and informed 
him that Del Toral would no longer be working on pHIl 
i(aW issues, and the two discussed the clear implication that 
EPA bureaucrats had intervened to prevent Del Toral from 
further exposing MDEQ’s numerous blunders and the health 
threat to Flint residents. She further stated that “It is too late 
for my son , but I will not stand by and let this happen 
to another other innocent child in Flint.” 

Clearly, the MDEQ, City of Flint and even the USEPA (with the 
obvious exception of Del Toral) have proved themselves 
unworthy of the public trust. Flint residents have been left to 
fend for themselves, when it comes to dealing with the dangers of 
high lead in their water. 


FlintWaterStudy was launched an hour after the phone call from 
Ms. Walters, to help the citizens of Flint deal with the lead-in- 
water crisis that MDEQ created, and to correct any false 
statements by uncaring agencies that have left Flint’s children in 
harm’s way. 

Documents: 

Emails between MDEQ, USEPA, and Ms. LeeAnne Walters : 


From: Scott, Allison (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2015 8:14 AM 

To: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Subject: Re: Flint Water updates 

What is most effective accurate rout? Dan provided update for briefing each day or does Comms shop speak to DEQ 
Comms and provide? 

Sent from my iPhone 

> On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:05 AM, Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

> 

> We need a better update system re Flint Water. 

> 

> I saw in the press this am that DHHS announced yesterday that water filters would start being given out today. This 
should have come internally with more detail. I had press questions last night. 

> 

> Overall, we should have a daily report on Flint until our recommendations are fully implemented. 

> 

> For example: 

> 1. What are the water test results from the public schools? 

>2. How many free test have been requested? How many have been done? How many remain and how long have 
they been waiting? What are the results - no lead, lead consistent with history, higher levels? 

> 3. How many filters have been distributed? How many unfulfilled requests? 

> 4. New blood test results? Especially in the two zip codes. 

> 5. Analysis of tech advisory group 

> 6. Analysis of the GLWA vs. Flint River vs. KWA. 

> 

> Thanks 

> Rick 

> 

> Sent from my iPad 


From: 

Scott, Allison (GOV) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, October 06, 2015 8:24 AM 

To: 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Cc: 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Flint Water updates 


I asked Dan to have his team reach out and include relevant other Dept info 
Sent from my iPhone 

> On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:22 AM, Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) < demente@rniehigan.gov > wrote: 

> 

> Nick Lyon plays a part in all of this too with testing and filters etc. We will need his updates as well. 

> 

> Sent from my iPad 

> 

» On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:20 AM, Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigan.gov > wrote: 

» 

» Update from Dan in briefing. Comms to also send update for briefing on stories or announcements upcoming. But 
Dan will have most accurate testing and analysis details to report. 

» 

» 

» 

» 

»> On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:14 AM, Scott, Allison (GOV) < scottal2@rnichigan.gov > wrote: 

>» 

>» What is most effective accurate rout? Dan provided update for briefing each day or does Comms shop speak to DEQ 
Comms and provide? 

>» 

>» Sent from my iPhone 
>» 

wrote: 

»» 

»» We need a better update system re Flint Water. 

»» 

»» I saw in the press this am that DHHS announced yesterday that water filters would start being given out today. 

This should have come internally with more detail. I had press questions last night. 

»» 

»» Overall, we should have a daily report on Flint until our recommendations are fully implemented. 

»» 

»» For example: 

»» 1. What are the water test results from the public schools? 

»» 2. How many free test have been requested? How many have been done? How many remain and how long have 
they been waiting? What are the results - no lead, lead consistent with history, higher levels? 

»» 3. How many filters have been distributed? How many unfulfilled requests? 

»» 4. New blood test results? Especially in the two zip codes. 

»» 5. Analysis of tech advisory group 

»» 6. Analysis of the GLWA vs. Flint River vs. KWA. 


»» On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:05 AM, Snyder, Rick (GOV) <1 


l 



»» 

»» Thanks 
»» Rick 
»» 

»» Sent from my iPad 


2 



From: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, October 06, 2015 8:35 AM 

To: 

Scott, Allison (GOV) 

Cc: 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Flint Water updates 


Treasury should have financial analysis on potential of moving back to DWSD done today. 

Sent from my iPhone 

> On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:23 AM, Scott, Allison (GOV) < scQtt3l2@rnicbig3n.gov > wrote: 

> 

> I asked Dan to have his team reach out and include relevant other Dept 

> info 

> 

> Sent from my iPhone 

> 

» On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:22 AM, Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) < demente@michig3n.gov > wrote: 

» 

» Nick Lyon plays a part in all of this too with testing and filters etc. We will need his updates as well. 

» 

» Sent from my iPad 

» 

»> On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:20 AM, Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigart.gov > wrote: 

>» 

>» Update from Dan in briefing. Comms to also send update for briefing on stories or announcements upcoming. But 
Dan will have most accurate testing and analysis details to report. 

>» 

>» 

>» 

>» 

»» On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:14 AM, Scott, Allison (GOV) < scottal2@michigan.gov > wrote: 

»» 

»» What is most effective accurate rout? Dan provided update for briefing each day or does Comms shop speak to 
DEQ Comms and provide? 

»» 

»» Sent from my iPhone 

»» 

»»> On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:05 AM, Snyder, Rick (GOV) wrote: 

>»» 

>»» We need a better update system re Flint Water. 

>»» 

>»» I saw in the press this am that DHHS announced yesterday that water filters would start being given out today. 
This should have come internally with more detail. I had press questions last night. 

>»» 

>»» Overall, we should have a daily report on Flint until our recommendations are fully implemented. 

>»» 

>»» For example: 


l 



»»> 1. What are the water test results from the public schools? 

»»> 2. How many free test have been requested? How many have been done? How many remain and how long have 
they been waiting? What are the results - no lead, lead consistent with history, higher levels? 

»»> 3. How many filters have been distributed? How many unfulfilled requests? 

»»> 4 . New blood test results? Especially in the two zip codes. 

»»> 5. Analysis of tech advisory group 6 . Analysis of the GLWA vs. 

»»> Flint River vs. KWA. 

»»> 

»»> Thanks 
»»> Rick 
»»> 

»»> Sent from my iPad 


2 



From: 

Scott, Allison (GOV) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, October 06, 2015 8:37 AM 

To: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Cc: 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Flint Water updates 


Good deal 

Dan and Gov will speak about 12/30 today for today's verbal update as well 
Sent from my iPhone 

> On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:34 AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < rn uchrnored @ m I chiga n ,gov > wrote: 

> 

> Treasury should have financial analysis on potential of moving back to DWSD done today. 

> 

> Sent from my iPhone 

> 

» On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:23 AM, Scott, Allison (GOV) < scottal2@michigan.gov > wrote: 

» 

» I asked Dan to have his team reach out and include relevant other 
» Dept info 

» 

» Sent from my iPhone 

» 

»> On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:22 AM, Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) < clemente@michigan.gov > wrote: 

»> 

»> Nick Lyon plays a part in all of this too with testing and filters etc. We will need his updates as well. 

»> 

»> Sent from my iPad 
»> 

»» On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:20 AM, Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Agenj@michig3n.gov > wrote: 

»» 

»» Update from Dan in briefing. Comms to also send update for briefing on stories or announcements upcoming. But 
Dan will have most accurate testing and analysis details to report. 

»» 

»» 

»» 

»» 

»»> On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:14 AM, Scott, Allison (GOV) < scott3l2@michigan.gQv > wrote: 

>»» 

>»» What is most effective accurate rout? Dan provided update for briefing each day or does Comms shop speak to 
DEQ Comms and provide? 

>»» 

>»» Sent from my iPhone 
>»» 

»»» On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:05 AM, Snyder, Rick (GOV) wrote: 

»»» 


l 



»»» We need a better update system re Flint Water. 

»»» 

»»» I saw in the press this am that DHHS announced yesterday that water filters would start being given out today. 
This should have come internally with more detail. I had press questions last night. 

»»» 

»»» Overall, we should have a daily report on Flint until our recommendations are fully implemented. 

»»» 

»»» For example: 

»»» 1. What are the water test results from the public schools? 

»»» 2. Flow many free test have been requested? Flow many have been done? Flow many remain and how long 
have they been waiting? What are the results - no lead, lead consistent with history, higher levels? 

»»» 3. Flow many filters have been distributed? Flow many unfulfilled requests? 

»»» 4. New blood test results? Especially in the two zip codes. 

»»» 5. Analysis of tech advisory group 6. Analysis of the GLWA vs. 

»»» Flint River vs. KWA. 

»»» 

»»» Thanks 
»»» Rick 
»»» 

»»» Sent from my iPad 


2 



From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2015 9:17 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Hollins, Harvey 

(GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: FW: PRESS RELEASE: Kroger & Al Serra Water Donations 

Attachments: Kroger & Al Serra Water Donation.pdf 


FY3 


From: Jason Lorenz [mailto:ilorenz@cityoffnnt.coml 

Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2015 8:34 AM 

Subject: PRESS RELEASE: Kroger & Al Serra Water Donations 


For Immediate Release 


Kroger Donates 19 Palettes of Bottled Water to Mayor Dayne Walling who Plans to 
Donate it to Flint Community Schools, Al Serra Auto Plaza to Hold Water Donation Drive 

to Help Flint Senior Centers 


Flint, Michigan - October 6, 2015 - Mayor Dayne Walling has received a donation from Kroger grocers of 19 
palettes of water to help those in the community struggling with water. The Mayor has in turn donated that 
water to the Flint Community Schools for distribution to students. In addition to the Kroger donation, Al Serra 
Auto Plaza of Grand Blanc has announced plans to hold a month long bottled water donation drive to collect 
water for distribution to Flint’s two Senior Centers as well as the Flint Community Schools. Details on that 
donation drive will be available at Al Serra' s Facebook page today. 

“Our children are a top priority given the effects lead can have on their development,” said Mayor Walling. 
“Any bottled water donations we receive will be used for our children and other high risk groups, such as our 
seniors. We continue to recommend that residents follow the instructions of the Genesee County Health 
Department concerning lead in drinking water.” 

The City has been working with local aid agencies to provide water relief to Flint residents. Last week the City 
worked with the United Way of Genesee County to provide residents with water tap filters and gave away over 
3,000 of them on Saturday, October 3, 2015 at the UM-Flint Recreation Center. On Friday it also was 
announced by the State of Michigan that $1 Million has been allocated to providing residents with water filters. 


l 



END-’ 


-Jason Lorenz 
Public Information Officer 
City of Flint 

(810) 237-2039 (Office) 
■■H(Cell) 

jlorenz@cityofflint.com 



2 




Office: (ai0)23^039 

CelkHMBBI 

For Immediate Release 

Kroger Donates 19 Palettes of Bottled Water to Mayor Dayne Walling 
who Plans to Donate it to Flint Community Schools, Al Serra Auto 
Plaza to Hold Water Donation Drive to Help Flint Senior Centers 

Flint, Michigan - October 6, 2015 - Mayor Dayne Walling has received a donation from 
Kroger grocers of 19 palettes of water to help those in the community struggling with 
water. The Mayor has in turn donated that water to the Flint Community Schools for 
distribution to students. In addition to the Kroger donation, Al Serra Auto Plaza of Grand 
Blanc has announced plans to hold a month long bottled water donation drive to collect 
water for distribution to Flint’s two Senior Centers as well as the Flint Community Schools. 
Details on that donation drive can be found at Ai Serra’s Facebook page . 

“Our children are a top priority given the effects lead can have on their development,” said 
Mayor Walling. “Any bottled water donations we receive will be used for our children and 
other high risk groups, such as our seniors. We continue to recommend that residents 
follow the instructions of the Genesee County Health Department concerning lead in 
drinking water.” 

The City has been working with local aid agencies to provide water relief to Flint residents. 
Last week the City worked with the United Way of Genesee County to provide residents 
with water tap filters and gave away over 3,000 of them on Saturday, October 3, 2015 at 
the UM-Flint Recreation Center. On Friday it also was announced by the State of Michigan 
that $1 Million has been allocated to providing residents with water filters. 

-END- 

City Hall 

1 101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 
810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7218 www.citvofflint.com 




From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 


Steve Arwood (MEDC) <arwoodsl@michigan.org > 

Tuesday, October 06, 2015 5:02 PM 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Tedder, Greg (LARA); Hendges, Jeremy (LARA); Brown, Melanie (LARA) 
Flint 


Watching this issue and wondering if they need short term financial assistance for infrastructure. Probably could help 
there, but not sure what all the issues are. We can take a look at anything that may be needed. Let us know. 


Steve Arwood, Director 

ARWOODS 1 CHiGAN.ORG i Lansing: 5 1 7-24 1 - 1 400 



TALENT and ECONOMIC 

mmm development 


Steve Arwood 
Chief Executive Officer 

Michigan Economic Development Corporation 
300 N. Washington Square j Lansing, Ml 48913 
Office: 517.241.1400 
Arwoodsl@michigan.ofg 


This message contains information which may be confidential and privileged. Unless you are the intended recipient (or 
authorized to receive this message for the intended recipient), you may not use, copy, disseminate or disclose to anyone 
the message or any information contained in the message, if you have received the message in error, please advise the 
sender by reply e-mail, and delete the message. Thank you very much. 


1 




From: Shaler, Karen (DEQ) on behalf of Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2015 5:05 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Dickinson, Sarah 

(GOV) 

Subject: Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT 

PRIVILEGED 


The Flint Drinking Water Action Plan was announced on October 2, 201 5. It included the following: 

• Testing in Flint public schools immediately 

• Offered free water testing to Flint residents 

• Provided free water filters to residents with concerns or who are included in state assistance 
programs 

• Expanding health exposure testing of individual homes 

• Accelerating corrosion controls in the Flint drinking water system 

• Accelerating water system improvements to address replacing lead service lines 

• Expediting the completion of the Karegnondi Water Authority pipeline 

• Expanding a Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee 

• Named Dr. Eden Wells as the Flint drinking water public health advisor 

• Boosted a comprehensive lead education program 

Testing in Flint Public Schools Immediately 

Samples were taken on October 2 and were received at DEQ laboratory over the weekend. Test 
results to date indicate 37 samples tested, 4 of which exceeded a federal action level, and 1 of those 
4 was a significant outlier. We will be compiling detailed information about which schools and area 
codes the test results came from and will be providing that information in our next update. 

We have met with DHHS, and we are working on developing response protocols, a communications 
plan, and guidance for schools when this data is reported. 

Offered Free Water Testing to Flint Residents 


We have received 4 sets of samples from Flint that represent individual residents. We will be 
compiling the total number and the results of those samples and reporting in a future report. 

Provided Free Water Filters to Residents with Concerns or Who are Included in State Assistance 
Programs 


DHHS held organizational meetings in Flint on October 5, and filter distribution by DFIHS started on 
October 6. Nick Lyon in DHHS is taking the lead in filter distribution. 

Expanding Health Exposure Testing of Individual Homes 

Dr. Wells and Dan Wyant have been in conversations about a protocol for exposure testing. Dr. 
Wells will take the lead on developing the protocol. 



Accelerating Corrosion Controls in the Flint Drinking Water System 


A conference call was held with U.S. EPA Regional Administrator Susan Hedman and national 
corrosion control experts. We asked two questions: 

1 . Which is a safer water source - DWSD or Flint River? 

2. If you don’t have an opinion on the safer source, what criteria should we use for an 
evaluation? 

EPA staff would not commit to a preference, but their evaluation of the criteria clearly lead to 
the conclusion that DWSD was a safer water source. EPA committed to submitting technical 
assistance to the Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee (Advisory Committee) 
meeting, which will be held on October 7 at 2:00 p.m. in Flint City Hall. 

DEQ met with the Flint Mayor, the city manager, and their water staff. Flint agreed to 
expediting corrosion controls. We discussed the agenda for the Advisory Committee 
meeting. The Advisory Committee will be asked to evaluate two respective water sources at 
their Wednesday meeting. 

We expect the Advisory Committee to recommend the water source that would address not 
only lead safety but also other water safety issues. 

Accelerating Water System Improvements to Address Replacing Lead Service Lines 

Conversations with Congressman Kildee and EPA have clarified the state would be allowed to use 
Drinking Water Revolving Loan funds to replace private drinking water service lines. Senator Ananich 
has been approached to introduce language clarifying the state’s authority. 

Expediting the Completion of the Karegnondi Water Authority Pipeline 

Dan Wyant has talked to Genesee County Drain Commissioner Jeff Wright. Mr. Wright has provided 
a list of issues that would help expedite the completion of the Karegnondi Water Authority 
pipeline. They include truck weight and frost law exemptions, talent identification, and expediting 
permits. 

Expanding a Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee 

EPA has appointed their national technical expert to the Advisory Committee, and we have appointed 
Alfred Franzblau, M.D., Professor of Environmental Health Services, University of Michigan, to the 
Advisory Committee. 

Named Dr. Eden Wells as the Flint Drinking Water Public Health Advisor 


Boosted a Comprehensive Lead Education Program 


Other Updates 

• Dan Wyant was interviewed on October 6 by CBS Evening News during filter distribution in 
Flint. Questions asked were: 

o Was it a mistake to go to Flint River water? 









Answer: We draw water from the surface waters; we treat it to safe drinking water 
standards. At issue is lead exposure. Lead exposure must be addressed. Actions are 
being taken to address the issue, 
o Did you put kids at risk? 

Answer: Lead exposure is a serious issue, and steps need to be taken to limit lead 
exposure. 

o Why did it take so long? 

Answer: DEQ has been there from the beginning addressing the issue of Flint 
water. Recent tests justify and require the actions taken. Action steps address short- 
term, intermediate, and long-term lead issues to ensure public safety and confidence of 
the drinking water. 

Dan Wyant also spoke to the Governor about Flint funding needs. A meeting is scheduled for 
October 7 at 8:00 a.m. to further discuss proposals. 

What we are telling Flint citizens is: 
o Have your water tested 

o Use only cold water for drinking, cooking, and preparing formula 
o Run water before use if it has not been used for several hours 
o Obtain a water filter approved for lead removal 
o Purchase lead-free plumbing components 
o Remove entire lead service lines 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Zimmer, Mike (LARA) 

Tuesday, October 06, 2015 6:25 PM 
Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 
Flint 


I am scratching my head a bit over what LARA could do to assist in the Flint situation. I can think of a couple things, but 
they are pretty tangential: 

1) MIOSHA: The bureau has a lab - 1 have reached out to Martha Yoder, the bureau director, to see if they have water 
testing capabilities. 

2) BCC: We can do inspections (and permitting) upon request - like we tried to do in the Detroit demo project. Irv Poke, 
the bureau director there, has already talked to DEQ about some pipe inspection in Flint schools, but we may be able to 
go farther if there is a need. 

3) MAE/PSC: Really can't think of anything, but they have lots of weird programs, so I have reached out to Val for 
suggestions. 

4) Organization: The Flint situation could benefit from a "all hands on deck" working group like that we have done for 
the last several years with winter fuels. Mostly the same cast of characters with a few departmental additions and a 
switch in the impacted interest groups. If Dan (or someone else) wants to run lead, I could loan Karen Towne to either 
staff/organize the meetings/calls or train the department staff person on the template of how these work. She is pretty 
experienced in organizing this kind of thing. 

Will keep thinking, but that's all I can come up with on short notice. 

Mike 

Sent from my iPad 


l 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Attachments: 


Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Wednesday, October 07, 2015 5:14 PM 
Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

KWA Contract (amended) 130165.2.pdf; ATT00001.txt 


l 



Resolution: 


130165.2 

Presented: 3 - 11-13 

Adopted: 3 - 25-13 


AMENDED RESOLUTION TO PURCHASE CAPACITY 
FROM KAREGNONDI WATER AUTHORITY 


BY THE MAYOR: 

The Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) is a governmental consortium of cities and 
counties in southeastern Michigan that was created to build a water pipeline that will provide 
water from Lake Huron to interested communities in Sanilac, Lapeer, and Genesee counties. 
The incorporating bodies that created the KWA are Sanilac County, Lapeer County, Genesee 
County, the City of Flint, and the City of Lapeer. 

The City of Flint is currently in a year to year contract with the City of Detroit for the 
purchase of water. A study was conducted that projected that staying with Detroit will cost the 
region $2.1 billion over the next 25 years. In contrast, if the region builds its own pipeline, the 
projected costs are $1.9 billion over the same period. After the initial 25 year period, the 
projected costs would be less then 25% of the projected water costs from Detroit. 

In order to build the pipeline, the KWA needs commitment from its members regarding 
the capacity that each member will purchase in the pipeline. The KWA is allowed to withdraw 
85 million gallons of water per day. Capacity is available to members in increments of 1 million 
gallons per day known as units. For each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer 
shall pay to the KWA a one time fee of $32,300.00. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the 
KWA not less then $32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated amount not 
to exceed $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the bonds are paid in full. If it is 
determined that the costs per unit will exceed $355,300.00 the buyer has a right to cancel the 
contract. 

The purchase of capacity along with the payment of other costs necessary to operate the 
pipeline gives the member a right to water for sale to its customers. The buyer has a right to 
resell capacity and water rights. Each party entering into a capacity contract shall also be 
entitled to appoint additional board members equal to the party’s percentage share of the total 
capacity under contract. 

The City of Flint has decided that it is in its long term best interests to enter into a 
contract with the KWA to purchase SIXTEEN (16) units of capacity, plus TWO (2) units from 
the Flint River. 



IT IS RESOLVED that City officials are authorized to enter into a contract with KWA 
to purchase SIXTEEN (16) units of capacity, plus TWO (2) units from the Flint River. 

IT IS FURTHER RESOLVED that the City Administrator is authorized to provide 
KWA information needed to administer the contract and, with approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. 


APPROVED AS TO FORM: 



APPROVED AS TO FINANCE: 


Gerald Ambrose 
Finance Director 


APPROVED BY MAYOR: 


Dayne Walling 
Mayor 


APPROVED BY CITY COUNCIL 
ON: March 25. 2013 

Inez Brown /J 
Clerk, City of Flint 


APPROVED BY 
CITY COUNCIL 

MAR 25 2013 

■•A :L>v 


S:\JP\Ordinances and Resos\KWA.03.08.13.doc 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Wednesday, October 07, 2015 7:12 PM 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Biehl, Laura (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis 
(GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Fwd: URGENT review please — Draft Flint water release 
ATT00001.htm; 151008 Flint water release_V2.docx; ATT00002.htm 


I think this looks good but are we missing an opportunity to shout out all the entities that have stepped up to help? GM, 
Home Depot, etc. etc.? 

If Harvey has the full list, perhaps it could even be attached as an addendum. The point is that a lot of people did come 
together to address the problem, including the private sector and various volunteer organizations. I think it says 
something special about this state rallying to help one of its cities. 

Rich 

Sent from my iPad 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Biehl, Laura (GOV)" <Bi ehiL@rfi ic higan.gov > 

Date: October 7, 2015 at 6:46:28 PM EDT 

To: "Murray, David (GOV)" < M u rr ay D 1 j g m i ch I ga n . go v>, "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < Agen.; @ m i chigg n.,g.o.y>, 

"Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" < W u rf e I s @ Michigan. gov > , "Heaton, Anna (GOV)" <H eatonA@miehig3n,gO¥ >, 

"Kennedy, Jordan (GOV)" < Kennedyj4@michigan.gov> , "Brown, Jessica (GOV)" 

<Brownj53@michigan.gov>, "Paciorek, Josh (GOV)" <Pacior ekj@m ichig3n.gov>, "Lasher, Geralyn 
(DHHS)" <lasherg@michigan,goy>, "Minicuci, Angela (DHHS)" <MinicuciA@michi gan. gov>, "Eisner, 

Jennifer (DHHS)" < Eis ne rJ@mic higan,gov>, "Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" <Wairfels@michig3n.gQv>, "Tommasulo, 

Karen (DEQ)" <Tq m m a s u i o K @ m i c h i ga n . gov >, "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" <demente@michigan.gov>, 
"Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" < m u c h m o red @ rn i c h i ga n , go v > , "Posthumus, Dick (GOV)" 
<Posthumusd@michigan.gov>, "Baird, Richard (GOV)" < b3irdr@mieh lgan.gov>, "Calley, Brian (GOV)" 
<^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^|'Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV)" <forstnernl@michlgan.goy> 

Subject: RE: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 

See new version attached. Small revisions made and placeholders added for Mayor and Mott 
Foundation Quotes. 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 6:12 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Age n J @ rn i dhg3n.gov > ; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfeis@rriichlgan.goy >; Biehl, 
Laura (GOV) < B i e hi t@ rn i ch iff a n .gov > ; Heaton, Anna (GOV) < Hea fonA@michlgan.gov >; Kennedy, Jordan 
(GOV) < KennedvJ4@rnlchig3n.gov >; Brown, Jessica (GOV) < Brown J S3 @ m i ch i ga n .go v > ; Paciorek, Josh 
(GOV) < Facioreki@mich8gan.gov >: Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS) < lashefg@rnichigan.gov >; Minicuci, Angela 
(DHHS) < M I n i cuci A @ m i ch iga n . gov > ; Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS) < Eisner j@michigan.goy >; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 
< Wurfels@michig3n.gov >: Tommasulo, Karen (DEQ) < TonuriasuioK@Sft:ichigan.gov >; Clement, Elizabeth 
(GOV) < demente@miehlgan.gov >; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@rnichigan.gov >; Posthumus, 
Dick (GOV) < Fgjsthurnusri@rnichigan.gov >; Baird, Richard (GOV) < hairdr@rnichigan.gov >; Calley, Brian 


l 



(GOV) Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV) < forstnerrd@msch;garKROv > 

Subject: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 

Team, 

Please review this draft press release for the Thursday announcement in Flint. This incorporates some 
suggested edits to the strong draft from DEQ earlier today. 

Thank you very much. 

Gov. Rick Snyder: Move back to Detroit water 
provides best protection for public health in Flint 

State, Mott Foundation and city form partnership to fund switch 

FLINT, Mich. - Flint families and children will be better protected by reconnecting with the Great 
Lakes Water Authority as the source of the city’s drinking water, Gov. Rick Snyder said. 

Snyder said Thursday that he will request the state Legislature to provide a portion of the $12 
million needed to reconnect with the authority, with the Flint city government providing $2 million 
and the Charles Stewart Mott Foundation donating $4 million. 

The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of Environmental 
Quality today also committed an additional $3.5 million for water filters, free lead testing through 
the state laboratory for Flint water customers, and hiring additional staff to conduct health 
exposure monitoring for lead in drinking water. 

Flint city leaders requested the state’s help to fund the reconnection after a Wednesday meeting 
of Flint’s Technical Advisory Committee. Flint’s move to the Great Lakes Water Authority is 
expected to cost about $1.3 million per month until the Karegnondi Water Authority is completed 
next summer. 

“All Flint residents need clean, safe drinking water,” Snyder said. “The technical experts helping 
the city on its water advisory all agree this move back to the Great Lakes Water Authority 
provides the best public health protection for children and families. This effort today is the result 
of people coming together to solve a problem. I appreciate Detroit’s willingness to reconnect 
with Flint, the Mott Foundation’s generous donation, and the dedication of all parties to come 
together to protect Flint families and children.” 

The move to Detroit water, which is drawn from Lake Huron, carries many public health benefits. 
As large bodies of water, the Great Lakes are naturally prone to fewer problems from large rain 
events and other runoff issues that can be present in shallower rivers. Additionally, the Great 
Lakes Water Authority has already fully optimized its corrosion control, using phosphates to help 
coat the insides of pipes and prevent lead from leaching into the water. 

However, reconnecting with the authority will not completely resolve the city’s problem with lead 
service lines or aging infrastructure. It will take time for pipes in Flint to become coated with the 
phosphate corrosion control. Additionally, some households in the city could experience lead in 
their drinking water until all lead pipes and plumbing are replaced. 

To best protect public health, Snyder said state and local authorities will continue to carry out 
steps outlined on Oct. 2 in a comprehensive action plan, including continued testing, the use of 
faucet filters and providing residents with accurate information about steps to eliminate lead in 
water. 


2 


Free filters are available for current MDHHS clients at the 125 E. Union St. or 4809 Clio Road 
MDHHS office locations. 

For residents who are not currently enrolled in MDHHS assistance programs, free filters are 
available at the Genesee County Community Action Resource Department offices at 2727 
Lippincott and 601 North Saginaw in Flint. Staff will be at all four locations from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., 
Monday through Friday, to distribute filters and assist residents who have questions about 
proper installation. 

At the Lippincott location only, extended hours will be offered this weekend, including until 7 p.m. 
on Thursday and Friday and from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. on Saturday. 

Other good practices for residents concerned about lead include turning on the cold water tap 
and running the water until it’s as cold as it will go. Additionally, only use cold water for cooking, 
drinking and especially mixing baby formula. 

School test results released; more investigation planned 

The state today also released the first results from its lead screening program in schools and 
homes. Of 37 total samples taken at 13 buildings, four samples spread over three buildings 
exceeded the federal action level of 15 parts per billion. 

However, this sampling provides only an initial screen, and the state is committing to further 
testing water and inspecting plumbing at these schools. Until testing is complete, schools are 
advised to continue using bottled water and filtration as a precaution to protect children. 

In addition, free testing is still available for any other Flint school, including daycares and Head 
Starts. Free testing is also available for any Flint resident. 

Additional information, including more detailed lead screening results, is available at 

:vmw.:.qx^ 

ii ii ii 

77 it it 

II ii II 


Dave Murray 

Deputy Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 

MurrayDl@rriichisan.Kov 

517-335-6397, office 

IT* mobile 

Twitter:@michigandmurray 


3 



RICK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 


State or Michigan 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE 

LANSING 


BRIAN GALLEY 

LT. GOVERNOR 


CONTACTS: 

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 

Sara Wurfel or Dave Murray 

Governor’s Office: 517-335-6397 

Thursday, Oct. 8, 2015 

Brad Wurfel. 517-284-6713 
Department of Environmental Quality 


Jennifer Eisner, 517-230-9804 
Department of Health and Human Services 



Gov. Rick Snyder: Move back to Detroit water 
provides best protection for public health in Flint 

State, Mott Foundation and city form partnership to fund switch 


FLINT, Mich. - Flint families and children will be better protected by reconnecting with the Great 
Lakes Water Authority as the source of the city’s drinking water, Gov. Rick Snyder said. 

Snyder said Thursday that he will request the state Legislature to provide half, or $6 million, of 
the $12 million needed to reconnect with the authority. The Flint city government will provide $2 
million and the Charles Stewart Mott Foundation will donate $4 million. 

“All Flint residents need clean, safe drinking water,” Snyder said. “The technical experts helping 
the city on its water advisory all agree this move back to the Great Lakes Water Authority 
provides the best public health protection for children and families. This effort today is the result 
of people coming together to solve a problem. I appreciate Detroit’s willingness to reconnect 
with Flint, the Mott Foundation’s generous donation, and the dedication of all parties to come 
together to protect Flint families and children.” 

The Michigan Departments of Environmental Quality and Health and Human Services today 
also committed an additional $3.5 million for water filters, free lead testing through the state 
laboratory for Flint water customers, and hiring additional staff to conduct health exposure 
monitoring for lead in drinking water. 

Flint city leaders requested the state’s help to fund the reconnection after a Wednesday meeting 
of Flint’s Technical Advisory Committee. Flint’s move to the Great Lakes Water Authority is 
expected to cost about $1.3 million per month until the Karegnondi Water Authority is completed 
next summer. 

INSERT MAYOR QUOTE HERE 

The move to Detroit water, which is drawn from Lake Huron, carries many public health 
benefits. As large bodies of water, the Great Lakes are naturally prone to fewer problems from 
large rain events and other runoff issues that can be present in shallower rivers. Additionally, 
the Great Lakes Water Authority has already fully optimized its corrosion control, using 
phosphates to help coat the insides of pipes and prevent lead from leaching into the water. 




However, reconnecting with the authority will not completely resolve the city’s problem with lead 
service lines or aging infrastructure. It will take time for pipes in Flint to become coated with the 
phosphate corrosion control. Additionally, some households in the city could experience lead in 
their drinking water until all lead pipes and plumbing are replaced. 

INSERT MOTT FOUNDATION QUOTE HERE 

To best protect public health, Snyder said state and local authorities will continue to carry out 
steps outlined on Oct. 2 in a comprehensive action plan, including continued testing, the use of 
faucet filters and providing residents with accurate information about steps to eliminate lead 
exposure. 

Free filters are available for current MDHHS clients at the 125 E. Union St. or 4809 Clio Road 
MDHHS office locations. For residents who are not currently enrolled in MDHHS assistance 
programs, free filters are available at the Genesee County Community Action Resource 
Department offices at 2727 Lippincott and 601 North Saginaw in Flint. Staff will be at all four 
locations from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, to distribute filters and assist residents 
who have questions about proper installation. At the Lippincott location only, extended hours will 
be offered this weekend, including until 7 p.m. on Thursday and Friday and from 10 a.m. to 2 
p.m. on Saturday. 

Other good practices for residents concerned about lead include turning on the cold water tap 
and running the water until it’s as cold as it will go. Additionally, only use cold water for cooking, 
drinking and especially mixing baby formula. 

School test results released; more investigation planned 

The state today also released the first results from its lead screening program in schools and 
homes. Of 37 total samples taken at 13 buildings, four samples spread over three buildings 
exceeded the federal action level of 15 parts per billion. 

However, this sampling provides only an initial screen, and the state is committing to further 
testing water and inspecting plumbing at these schools. Until testing is complete, schools are 
advised to continue using bottled water and filtration as a precaution to protect children. 

In addition, free testing is still available for any other Flint school, including daycares and Head 
Starts. Free testing is also available for any Flint resident. 

Additional information, including more detailed lead screening results, is available at 

www.michiqan.gov/flintwater . 



From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 7:52 PM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Biehl, Laura (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth 

(GOV) 

Subject: Re: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 


Thanks Rich. I'll send a list of players that I am aware of later. I have two observations re the release below. 

1 ) 


Gov. Rick Snyder: Move back to Detroit water provides best protection for public health in Flint UNTIL KWA IS 

ONLINE 


State, Mott Foundation and city form partnership to fund switch 


FLINT, Mich. - Flint families and children will be better protected by reconnecting with the Great Lakes Water 
Authority as the source of the city’ s drinking water UNTIL KWA IS ONLINE, Gov. Rick Snyder said. 


******* although KWA is referenced later, the opening implies that this is a permanent switch and that KWA will be 
substandard to GLWA******** 

2 ) 


"The move to Detroit water, which is drawn from Lake Huron, carries many public health benefits. As 
large bodies of water, the Great Lakes are naturally prone to fewer problems from large rain events and 
other runoff issues that can be present in shallower rivers. Additionally, the Great Lakes Water Authority 
has already fully optimized its corrosion control, using phosphates to help coat the insides of pipes and 
prevent lead from leaching into the water. " 


*****this is a good statement and true as long as all municipalities get there water from the Great Lakes. If not, are we 
saying that there are other communities that do not have optimum drinking water? ***** 

Best, 

Harvey 

On Oct 7, 2015, at 7:12 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@michigan.gov > wrote: 

I think this looks good but are we missing an opportunity to shout out all the entities that have stepped 
up to help? GM, Home Depot, etc. etc.? 


l 



If Harvey has the full list, perhaps it could even be attached as an addendum. The point is that a lot of 
people did come together to address the problem, including the private sector and various volunteer 
organizations. I think it says something special about this state rallying to help one of its cities. 


Rich 

Sent from my iPad 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Biehl, Laura (GOV)" <B ieh SL @ rnichigan. go v> 

Date: October 7, 2015 at 6:46:28 PM EDT 

To: "Murray, David (GOV)" < M r ravD ST ^ "Agen, Jarrod (GO V)" 
< Agslf.y.@.rDi^.b.!S.3.Q:gSv. > / "Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" < Wurfels@michigan,gov >. "Heaton, Anna 
(GOV)" <Hejj.onA.@m "Kennedy, Jordan (GOV)" 

< IT/j. >, "Brown, Jessica (GOV)" <Brown.j53^ 

"Paciorek, Josh (GOV)" < i = A® T: 1 S Albi f 10.-- IT 9: / "Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS)" 

< ! SH?. n? 0 V "Minicuci, Angela (DHHS)" <M[inicycJA@m 
"Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS)" < Ei$ner.i@michiRan,gov> . "Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" 
< W.y.rf.A(c.SL0.liAb.ig3n,gov>, "Tommasulo, Karen (DEQ)" 

"Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" < demente@michigan.gov> . "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 

< 1.01 0 f.O.Q.r.^.sl.^.02 0 1 S EP.Y 5 * / "Posthumus, Dick (GOV)" <Ppstht;m^ 

"Baird, Richard (GOV)" <b.3(rdr@r. nlchj£an.£oy>, "Calley, Brian (GOV)" 

"Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV)" <forstnerni 

Subject: RE: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 

See new version attached. Small revisions made and placeholders added for Mayor and 
Mott Foundation Quotes. 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 6:12 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michig3n.gov >; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

< Wurfeis@michigan.gov >; Biehl, Laura (GOV) < BiehlL@mlchigari.gov >; Heaton, Anna 
(GOV) < HeatonA@michigan.gov >; Kennedy, Jordan (GOV) < Rennedyj4@mlchigan.gov >; 

Brown, Jessica (GOV) < BrownJS3@michigan.gov >; Paciorek, Josh (GOV) 

< P3ciorekj@mlchigan.goy >; Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS) < iasherg@michjgan.gov >; Minicuci, 
Angela (DHHS) < MinlcudA@n'ilchigan.gov >; Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS) 
< Ei3nerJ@michigan.gov >; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wu rfei s @ m i ch iga n . go v > ; Tommasulo, 
Karen (DEQ) < To rrt m as u I o K @ mi ch iga ri.gov >; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
< demente@mlchigan.gov >; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michlgan.gov >; 
Posthumus, Dick (GOV) < Post h u m usd @ m ich iga n .go v > ; Baird, Richard (GOV) 
< bairdr@michigan.gov >; Calley, Brian (GOV) Forstner, 

Nathaniel (GOV) < for3tnerrtl@rnichlgan.gov > 

Subject: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 

Team, 

Please review this draft press release for the Thursday announcement in Flint. This 
incorporates some suggested edits to the strong draft from DEQ earlier today. 


Thank you very much. 


2 



Gov. Rick Snyder: Move back to Detroit 
water provides best protection for public 

health in Flint 

State, Mott Foundation and city form partnership to fund 

switch 

FLINT, Mich. - Flint families and children will be better protected by reconnecting 
with the Great Lakes Water Authority as the source of the city’s drinking water, 
Gov. Rick Snyder said. 

Snyder said Thursday that he will request the state Legislature to provide a 
portion of the $12 million needed to reconnect with the authority, with the Flint 
city government providing $2 million and the Charles Stewart Mott Foundation 
donating $4 million. 

The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of 
Environmental Quality today also committed an additional $3.5 million for water 
filters, free lead testing through the state laboratory for Flint water customers, 
and hiring additional staff to conduct health exposure monitoring for lead in 
drinking water. 

Flint city leaders requested the state’s help to fund the reconnection after a 
Wednesday meeting of Flint’s Technical Advisory Committee. Flint’s move to the 
Great Lakes Water Authority is expected to cost about $1 .3 million per month 
until the Karegnondi Water Authority is completed next summer. 

“All Flint residents need clean, safe drinking water,” Snyder said. “The technical 
experts helping the city on its water advisory all agree this move back to the 
Great Lakes Water Authority provides the best public health protection for 
children and families. This effort today is the result of people coming together to 
solve a problem. I appreciate Detroit’s willingness to reconnect with Flint, the 
Mott Foundation’s generous donation, and the dedication of all parties to come 
together to protect Flint families and children.” 

The move to Detroit water, which is drawn from Lake Huron, carries many public 
health benefits. As large bodies of water, the Great Lakes are naturally prone to 
fewer problems from large rain events and other runoff issues that can be 
present in shallower rivers. Additionally, the Great Lakes Water Authority has 
already fully optimized its corrosion control, using phosphates to help coat the 
insides of pipes and prevent lead from leaching into the water. 

However, reconnecting with the authority will not completely resolve the city’s 
problem with lead service lines or aging infrastructure. It will take time for pipes in 
Flint to become coated with the phosphate corrosion control. Additionally, some 
households in the city could experience lead in their drinking water until all lead 
pipes and plumbing are replaced. 

To best protect public health, Snyder said state and local authorities will continue 
to carry out steps outlined on Oct. 2 in a comprehensive action plan, including 
continued testing, the use of faucet filters and providing residents with accurate 
information about steps to eliminate lead in water. 


3 



Free filters are available for current MDHHS clients at the 125 E. Union St. or 
4809 Clio Road MDHHS office locations. 

For residents who are not currently enrolled in MDHHS assistance programs, 
free filters are available at the Genesee County Community Action Resource 
Department offices at 2727 Lippincott and 601 North Saginaw in Flint. Staff will 
be at all four locations from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, to distribute 
filters and assist residents who have questions about proper installation. 

At the Lippincott location only, extended hours will be offered this weekend, 
including until 7 p.m. on Thursday and Friday and from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. on 
Saturday. 

Other good practices for residents concerned about lead include turning on the 
cold water tap and running the water until it’s as cold as it will go. Additionally, 
only use cold water for cooking, drinking and especially mixing baby formula. 

School test results released; more investigation planned 

The state today also released the first results from its lead screening program in 
schools and homes. Of 37 total samples taken at 13 buildings, four samples 
spread over three buildings exceeded the federal action level of 15 parts per 
billion. 

However, this sampling provides only an initial screen, and the state is 
committing to further testing water and inspecting plumbing at these schools. 

Until testing is complete, schools are advised to continue using bottled water and 
filtration as a precaution to protect children. 

In addition, free testing is still available for any other Flint school, including 
daycares and Head Starts. Free testing is also available for any Flint resident. 

Additional information, including more detailed lead screening results, is available 

at wyvvv.michi q an q ov/flintvvater. 

a a a 

IT I I I 1 
II II II 


Dave Murray 

Deputy Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 
MurravDljS rnichigan.gov 
517-335-6397, office 
mobile 

Twitter: (©michigandmurray 


<151008 Flint water release_V2.docx> 


4 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 


Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Thursday, October 08, 2015 8:58 AM 
Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Biehl, Laura (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
RE: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 


If we list the names well undoubtedly miss someone. Great idea, but I don't think it will work. For instance, the kids in 
the Say County districts are raising money for water purchases in the schools and you wouldn't want to leave them 
out. The Health Endowment Fund really doesn't deserve a lot of credit but they'll want it anyway, etc., etc. 


From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 8, 2015 8:08 AM 
To: Baird, Richard (GOV) <bairdr@michigan.gov> 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Biehl, Laura (GOV) <BiehlL@michigan.gov>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 
<muchmored@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov> 

Subject: Re: URGENT review please - Draft Flint water release 

Listing names is going to be problematic since there are many firms that are engaged of which I am unaware: 

1) 

2) GM 

3) Flint Community Foundation 

4) United Way of Flint 

5) Absopure 

6) Home Depot 

7) UAW locals 

8) Similac 

9) A number of faith based organizations 

10) Flint Food Bank 

11) McClaren Hospital 

12) Hurley Hospital 

There are others that have contributed that I don't have information on. 

It would be easier say something like, "I want to thank the number of people, organizations, philanthropic and 
corporations that have engaged to address the problem. They didn't point fingers and access blame, they saw the 
problem and contributed to solutions, and that action says something special about this state, we rally to help each 
other." 


On Oct 7, 2015, at 7:12 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@michtgan.gov > wrote: 

I think this looks good but are we missing an opportunity to shout out all the entities that have stepped 
up to help? GM, Home Depot, etc. etc.? 


l 



If Harvey has the full list, perhaps it could even be attached as an addendum. The point is that a lot of 
people did come together to address the problem, including the private sector and various volunteer 
organizations. I think it says something special about this state rallying to help one of its cities. 

Rich 


Best, 

Harvey Hollins III, Director 
Governor’ s Office of Urban Initiatives 


313.4S6.4994 (office) 


Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Biehl, Laura (GOV)" < Btehit@michigan,goy > 

Date: October 7, 2015 at 6:46:28 PM EDT 

To: "Murray, David (GOV)" < M u ; r ay D 1 @ rn I ch i ga n . go v > , "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" 

< AgenJ@michigan.gov >. "Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" < vyuffeis@michlgan,gov >. "Heaton, Anna 
(GOV)" < HeatonA@michigan.goy> . "Kennedy, Jordan (GOV)" 
< Kennedyj4@rtiichigan.gov >. "Brown, Jessica (GOV)" < Brownj53@michigan.gov >, 

"Paciorek, Josh (GOV)" < Pacioreki@mlchigan,gov >, "Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS)" 
< jasherg@michigan.gov >. "Minicuci, Angela (DHHS)" < MinicyciA@michlgan.gov >, 
"Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS)" < E i s r \ e rJ @ m i ch ; ga n. go v > , "Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" 
< Wurfels@mlchigan.gov >. "Tommasulo, Karen (DEQ)” < TornmasujoK@michsgsri.goy >. 

"Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" < ciement< 2 @michigan.gov >, "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 
< muchmored@michigan.gov >, "Posthumus, Dick (GOV)" < Posthumusd@michigan,gov >, 

"Baird, Richard (GOV)" < bairdr@michigan.gov >, "Calley, Brian (GOV)" 

"Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV)" < forstnarnl@miehigan.gov > 

Subject: RE: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 

See new version attached. Small revisions made and placeholders added for Mayor and 
Mott Foundation Quotes. 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 6:12 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <Agenj@michi ga n.gQv>; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

<Wurfei5@n'ilchigan.gov>; Biehl, Laura (GOV) <Si eh ll@mjchigan.gov>; Heaton, Anna 
(GOV) <HeatonA@mi chiga n.gov>; Kennedy, Jordan (GOV) <Kenneciyj4@michigan.gov>; 

Brown, Jessica (GOV) <Brown.l53@m Paciorek, Josh (GOV) 

< E'f.frLQ.T .sfK .Q.l Is.bJ. J Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS) Minicuci, 

Angela (DHHS) <MimcuciA^ Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS) 


< hJ. ft.n.fv Tf. tile OV ; .i > j Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wy r[e]s@n: j ch I ga n...gpy> ; Tommasulo, 

Karen (DEQ) <AWD.l jJ. 0.-J. j Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
<cie m e nte@michigan.gov >: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michigan.gov >: 

Posthumus, Dick (GOV) <B; : sthym^ Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Calley, Brian (GOV) Forstner, 

Nathaniel (GOV) <forstne^ 

Subject: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 


2 




Team, 


Please review this draft press release for the Thursday announcement in Flint. This 
incorporates some suggested edits to the strong draft from DEQ earlier today. 

Thank you very much. 

Gov. Rick Snyder: Move back to Detroit 
water provides best protection for public 

health in Flint 

State, Mott Foundation and city form partnership to fund 

switch 

FLINT, Mich. - Flint families and children will be better protected by reconnecting 
with the Great Lakes Water Authority as the source of the city’s drinking water, 
Gov. Rick Snyder said. 

Snyder said Thursday that he will request the state Legislature to provide a 
portion of the $12 million needed to reconnect with the authority, with the Flint 
city government providing $2 million and the Charles Stewart Mott Foundation 
donating $4 million. 

The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of 
Environmental Quality today also committed an additional $3.5 million for water 
filters, free lead testing through the state laboratory for Flint water customers, 
and hiring additional staff to conduct health exposure monitoring for lead in 
drinking water. 

Flint city leaders requested the state’s help to fund the reconnection after a 
Wednesday meeting of Flint’s Technical Advisory Committee. Flint’s move to the 
Great Lakes Water Authority is expected to cost about $1 .3 million per month 
until the Karegnondi Water Authority is completed next summer. 

“All Flint residents need clean, safe drinking water,” Snyder said. “The technical 
experts helping the city on its water advisory all agree this move back to the 
Great Lakes Water Authority provides the best public health protection for 
children and families. This effort today is the result of people coming together to 
solve a problem. I appreciate Detroit’s willingness to reconnect with Flint, the 
Mott Foundation’s generous donation, and the dedication of all parties to come 
together to protect Flint families and children.” 

The move to Detroit water, which is drawn from Lake Huron, carries many public 
health benefits. As large bodies of water, the Great Lakes are naturally prone to 
fewer problems from large rain events and other runoff issues that can be 
present in shallower rivers. Additionally, the Great Lakes Water Authority has 
already fully optimized its corrosion control, using phosphates to help coat the 
insides of pipes and prevent lead from leaching into the water. 

However, reconnecting with the authority will not completely resolve the city’s 
problem with lead service lines or aging infrastructure. It will take time for pipes in 
Flint to become coated with the phosphate corrosion control. Additionally, some 


3 



households in the city could experience lead in their drinking water until all lead 
pipes and plumbing are replaced. 

To best protect public health, Snyder said state and local authorities will continue 
to carry out steps outlined on Oct. 2 in a comprehensive action plan, including 
continued testing, the use of faucet filters and providing residents with accurate 
information about steps to eliminate lead in water. 

Free filters are available for current MDHHS clients at the 125 E. Union St. or 
4809 Clio Road MDHHS office locations. 

For residents who are not currently enrolled in MDHHS assistance programs, 
free filters are available at the Genesee County Community Action Resource 
Department offices at 2727 Lippincott and 601 North Saginaw in Flint. Staff will 
be at all four locations from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, to distribute 
filters and assist residents who have questions about proper installation. 

At the Lippincott location only, extended hours will be offered this weekend, 
including until 7 p.m. on Thursday and Friday and from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. on 
Saturday. 

Other good practices for residents concerned about lead include turning on the 
cold water tap and running the water until it’s as cold as it will go. Additionally, 
only use cold water for cooking, drinking and especially mixing baby formula. 

School test results released; more investigation planned 


The state today also released the first results from its lead screening program in 
schools and homes. Of 37 total samples taken at 13 buildings, four samples 
spread over three buildings exceeded the federal action level of 15 parts per 
billion. 


However, this sampling provides only an initial screen, and the state is 
committing to further testing water and inspecting plumbing at these schools. 

Until testing is complete, schools are advised to continue using bottled water and 
filtration as a precaution to protect children. 

In addition, free testing is still available for any other Flint school, including 
daycares and Head Starts. Free testing is also available for any Flint resident. 


Additional information, including more detailed lead screening results, is available 

at wvwv.michigan.aov/fiintwater . 

ii ii ii 
TT l III 
II II II 


Dave Murray 

Deputy Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 


5^^3^397^ office 

I^CTagaBSaMi-nnhiip 

Twitter:@michigandmurray 


4 


<151008 Flint water release_V2.docx> 


5 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 


Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Monday, October 12, 2015 2:13 PM 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

RE: Flint next steps meeting 


Jarrod - Before I reached out to Dan and Nick's offices I thought I'd see if there was a time that worked for a majority of 
our people. Along with your guys calendars, I can see Dick, Rich's and John Walsh's calendars and there is not a time 
where they are all available at the same time. So can you tell me which one or ones we can lose. Rich is out all day 
tomorrow and then flies to Nashville Wednesday night and is off on Thursday. 

Original Message 

From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, October 12, 2015 2:05 PM 

To: Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) < wisriiewskiw^'michigan.Rov > 

Cc: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) < clementejQrnichigan.gov > 

Subject: Flint next steps meeting 


Wendy, 

Can we arrange a meeting in next couple days to discuss next steps with Flint and the after action report for water 
testing. 

Need to have Dennis, Beth, and me (or two of the three). 

Rich 

Dan Wyant 
Nick Lyon 
Harvey 
Walsh 

Wurfel/Murray 

Redford 

Dick 

Thanks 

Jarrod 


l 



From: 

Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, October 13, 2015 12:18 PM 

To: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Hollins, 
Harvey (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Cc: 

Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: 

Fwd: MDP Statement: Those Responsible for Flint Water Crisis Must Be Held 
Accountable 


Please see below. 

We're going to address by noting that this move to was something that community had supported as well, that 
we know Darnell cares deeply about kids and the residents he serves, but that primarily we're focused on future 
and all the steps we are taking in collaboration with all parties to ensure that Flint has safe drinking water and 
we're protecting public health, and that we will be conducting a full after action review. 

Let me know ASAP if anyone has any concerns with that or other tweaks/ideas, otherwise, that's what we're 
going with. 

Thanks and best, 

SW 

Sent from my iPad 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: Ronald Fonger <RFONGERl @mlive.com> 

Date: October 13, 2015 at 10:12:12 AM EDT 

To: " wurfels@tnichigan.gov " <wurfel s@mi ch i ga n go v> 

Subject: FW: MDP Statement: Those Responsible for Flint Water Crisis Must Be Held 
Accountable 

Sara: 

Would your office want to comment on this call from state Dems for the governor to fire Darnel! Earley 
from his position with the Detroit schools? 

Thanks, 


Ron Fonger 
MLive Media Group 
Reporter 


mobile 

email rfon ge rl @ mlive.com 

address 540 S. Saginaw St. #101, Flint Ml 48502 


From: MDP Press [ mailto:press@michigandems.com] 

Sent: Tuesday, October 13, 2015 8:52 AM 


To: MDP Press 

Subject: MDP Statement: Those Responsible for Flint Water Crisis Must Be Held Accountable 

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 

News from the Michigan Democratic Party 

October 13, 2015 

Contact: Paul Kanan, 517.371 .5410; pkanan@michiqandems.com 

MDP Statement: Those Responsible for Flint Water Crisis Must Be Held 

Accountable 


LANSING - The Michigan Democratic Party issued the following statement today, on behalf of Party 
Chair Brandon Dillon, demanding those responsible for the Flint water crisis be held accountable and 
calling on Governor Snyder to immediately fire former Flint EM, and current EM for Detroit Public Schools, 
Darnell Earley: 


“Accountability in government means answering to the people you serve, not just cleaning up your 
mistakes using their money,” said Brandon Dillon, Chair of the Michigan Democratic Party. 

“This catastrophe began with the governor’s appointed emergency manager, and as much as Governor 
Snyder would like to pretend, this is not a matter of negotiating at the boardroom table. This is a 
situation where you pay for your mistakes and put those responsible on the chopping block. 


“That is why we are calling for the immediate firing of the governor’s handpicked emergency manager 
for Flint, Darnell Earley. Earley was in charge when the decision was made to switch the city to unsafe 
drinking water. If poisoning children wasn’t bad enough, after Earley failed the citizens of Flint, the 
governor inexplicably rewarded him with another appointment - emergency manager for Detroit Public 
Schools - where he is now responsible for the education of nearly 50,000 students. 

“The children of Flint and Detroit are being robbed of what most of us take for granted - safe drinking 
water and a quality education. The wholesale theft of our children’s futures must end now. That begins 
with the removal from power all those that would sacrifice the future of a single child in Michigan - let 
alone thousands - in order to add a few extra dollars to the bottom line.” 


### 



From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 13, 2015 3:07 PM 

To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Cc: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Baird, Richard 

(GOV); Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: Re: MDP Statement: Those Responsible for Flint Water Crisis Must Be Held Accountable 


So, you don't want to say that the Governor doesn't believe he wants to execute his power under the constitution 
to remove the Mayor and Council of Flint, the Chair of the County Board of Commissioners and the Drain 
Commissioner since they ultimately brought this change to bear without proper understanding of the issues, and 
since they had previously approved the use of the Flint River to supplement the Genesee County system... I'm 
only being half facetious taking this tack... 

On Oct 13, 2015, at 12:18 PM, Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wurfel s@m ich iga n.g o v> wrote: 

Please see below. 

We're going to address by noting that this move to was something that community had supported 
as well, that we know Darnell cares deeply about kids and the residents he serves, but that 
primarily we're focused on future and all the steps we are taking in collaboration with all parties 
to ensure that Flint has safe drinking water and we're protecting public health, and that we will 
be conducting a full after action review. 

Let me know ASAP if anyone has any concerns with that or other tweaks/ideas, otherwise, that's 
what we're going with. 

Thanks and best, 

SW 

Sent from my iPad 
Begin forwarded message: 


From: Ronald Fonger <R.F ON GER 1 @ m 1 i v e . co m> 

Date: October 13, 2015 at 10: 12: 12 AM EDT 

To: " wurfel s@,miehigan. gov " < wurfels@michig3avgov > 

Subject: FW: MDP Statement: Those Responsible for Flint Water Crisis 
Must Be Held Accountable 

Sara: 

Would your office want to comment on this call from state Dems for the governor to fire 
Darnell Earley from his position with the Detroit schools? 
i hanks. 


Ron Fonger 
MLive Media Group 
Reporter 


mobile 



1 



email .( f o n^e r 1 : @ mjj ve .com 

address 540 S. Saginaw St. #101, Flint Ml 48502 


From: MDP Press [ maiito:press@michiaandems,coml 

Sent: Tuesday, October 13, 2015 8:52 AM 
To: MDP Press 

Subject: MDP Statement: Those Responsible for Flint Water Crisis Must Be Held 
Accountable 

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 

News from the Michigan Democratic Party 

October 13, 2015 

Contact: Paul Kanan, 517.371.5410 : pk3nan@michiQandetns.CGrn 

MDP Statement: Those Responsible for Flint Water Crisis 
Must Be Held Accountable 


LANSING - The Michigan Democratic Party issued the following statement today, on 
behalf of Party Chair Brandon Dillon, demanding those responsible for the Flint water 
crisis be held accountable and calling on Governor Snyder to immediately fire former Flint 
EM, and current EM for Detroit Public Schools, Darnell Earley: 


“Accountability in government means answering to the people you serve, not just 
cleaning up your mistakes using their money,” said Brandon Dillon, Chair of the 
Michigan Democratic Party. 

“This catastrophe began with the governor’s appointed emergency manager, and as 
much as Governor Snyder would like to pretend, this is not a matter of negotiating at 
the boardroom table. This is a situation where you pay for your mistakes and put those 
responsible on the chopping block. 


“That is why we are calling for the immediate firing of the governor’s handpicked 
emergency manager for Flint, Darnell Earley. Earley was in charge when the decision 
was made to switch the city to unsafe drinking water. If poisoning children wasn’t bad 
enough, after Earley failed the citizens of Flint, the governor inexplicably rewarded him 
with another appointment - emergency manager for Detroit Public Schools - where he 
is now responsible for the education of nearly 50,000 students. 

“The children of Flint and Detroit are being robbed of what most of us take for granted 
- safe drinking water and a quality education. The wholesale theft of our children’s 
futures must end now. That begins with the removal from power all those that would 
sacrifice the future of a single child in Michigan - let alone thousands - in order to add 
a few extra dollars to the bottom line.” 


### 


2 


Governor Rick Snyder 

November 6, 2015 
Weekend Briefing 


Contents Patii 


Signed Letters 


1 . DEQ Susan Hedman USEPA Flint Water 


52 








Redacted 2-51 



RICK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 


, v 




vt VM 


State of Michigan 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE 

LANSING 


BRIAN GALLEY 
LT, GOVERNOR 


November 6, 2015 


Dr. Susan Hedman, Regional Administrator 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 

77 West Jackson Boulevard (R-19J) 

Chicago, Illinois 80604-3507 

Dear Dr. Hedmani 

This letter is in follow up to a conference call on October 20, 2015 between the 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), Region 5, and the Michigan 
Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ), The purpose of that call was to discuss 
Region 5’s Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force (Task Force) that was established to 
provide the USEPA’s technical expertise to the MDEQ and the city of Flint, Michigan. 

During that call, it was requested that the State of Michigan provide the USEPA 
with an MDEQ point of contact for the Task Force. This letter is to inform you of the 
designation of Mr. Jim Sygo, Chief Deputy Director, MDEQ, as that point of contact. 
Mr. Sygo’s contact information is below; 

Michigan Department of Environmental Quality 

P.O. Box 30473 

Lansing, Mi 48909-7973 

svgoi@michiqan.qov 

617-284-6709 

Thank you for your assistance in this matter as we work together to ensure a 
safe and reliable drinking water supply for the city of Flint. 


Sincerely, 



Rick Snyder 
Governor 


cc: Mr. Robed Kaplan, Deputy Regional Administrator, USEPA, Region 5 
Mr. Dan Wyant, Director, MDEQ 
Mr, Jim Sygo, Chief Deputy Director, MDEQ 


GEORGE VW ROMNEY BUILDING * 111 SOUTH CAPITOL AVENUE * LANSING, WnOHiGAN 4B90Q 

www. firs? iganx^Gv 


Murray, David (GOV) 

Friday, October 16, 2015 2:11 PM 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Baird, 
Richard (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) 

DEQ reaction to the US EPA announcement? 

Flint Press Release.pdf 


Good afternoon, 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Sara asked me to share with you the DEQ's planned reaction to the U.S. EPA's press release about the Flint water 
situation, which is attached. Please let us know if you think we are missing anything. 


Dave 


Regarding the EPA announcement: 

”We are glad to have the continued technical support and counsel from our federal 
partners. We have been working closely with the U.S. EPA on the challenges in Flint, 
including its added presence on the city's technical advisory and the Governor’s 10- 
point plan. This is welcome news and we anticipate it will help us implement the 
Governors strategy.” 


i 



Sf3$as $ 

PKttfcGtyM 77 Wk>$t :5J:^ 

flgffltey Cfatiagg.- ftkxra- $6853 


SEPA Environmental 


Qftifc; WfcCsMSfo 



Contact Information: Anne Rowan, rowan 


i.qov 312-353-9391 


For Immediate Release No. 15-OPA160 


EPA Establishes Safe Drinking Water Task Force to Provide Technical 
Expertise to MDEQ and City of Flint 

Task Force providing technical assistance on reconnecting the Flint drinking 
water system to a new source 

CHICAGO (October 16, 2015) - Today U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Region 5 
Administrator Susan Hedman established the Flint Safe Drinking Water Task Force to provide 
the Agency's technical expertise through regular conversations with designated officials from 
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) and the City of Flint. The Task Force 
will be led by the Region 5 Deputy Regional Administrator and will assist with developing and 
implementing a plan to secure water quality, including measures to optimize corrosion 
control. Task Force members will be available to consult with MDEQ and the City of Flint on site 
in Flint. The Task Force will also coordinate as necessary with federal, state and local public 
health agencies to assist with protection of public health. 

Specifically, the Task Force will provide technical assistance to the MDEQ and the City of Flint to 
reconnect the Flint system to a new source of drinking water (to be supplied by the Great Lakes 
Water Authority) and to optimize corrosion control for the Flint system, starting in October 
2015. The Task Force will also provide technical assistance to the MDEQ and the City of Flint, as 
needed, in advance of and following connection of the Flint water system to a new source of 
drinking water (to be supplied by the Karegnondi Water Authority) and to optimize corrosion 
control for the Flint system, starting in 2016. 

"EPA is committed to working with our state and local partners to ensure a safe and reliable 
drinking water supply for the residents of Flint, Michigan," Hedman said. "The formation of this 
task force continues our commitment to providing technical assistance to the City of Flint and 
the State of Michigan." 

The Task Force will be comprised of scientists and technical experts from the EPA Region 5 
office in Chicago, the National Risk Management Research Lab in Cincinnati and the EPA 
drinking water program. In addition, EPA will ask the Governor to designate a MDEQ official and 
the Mayor of Flint to designate a city official, to serve as points of contact for the Task Force. 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Friday, October 16, 2015 4:32 PM 

To: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Lyon, Nick (DHHS); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Wurfel, Sara 

(GOV); Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: FW: PRESS RELEASE: City of Flint Reconnects to Detroit Water 

Attachments: CoF.DWSD.Agreement.2015.pdf 


fyi 

From: Jason Lorenz [maiitQ:jlQr6nz@cityoffiint.eom1 

Sent: Friday, October 16, 2015 4:09 PM 

Subject: PRESS RELEASE: City of Flint Reconnects to Detroit Water 


For Immediate Release 


City of Flint Reconnects to Detroit Water 


Flint, Michigan - October 16, 2015 ~ Flint has reconnected to Detroit water, reached an agreement with the 
Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (DWSD) for the temporary provision of treated Lake Huron water to 
Flint. Work to establish the reconnection will begin immediately in a coordinated effort between the City of 
Flint, Genesee County and the DWSD. 

A tremendous effort by all three partners, along with the efforts of the Governor and the State Legislature, 
ensured that this action occurred as quickly as possible. “The money from the state to begin fixing Flint water 
by reconnecting to Detroit is just a start - a down payment,' said Mayor Dayne Walling. “I am not going to stop 
until every drop of drinking water in Flint is 100% safe.” 

Detroit water will be introduced into the Flint system throughout the evening. It is expected that the thorough 
replacement from Flint River water to Detroit water will happen after approximately three weeks. Residents in 
Flint may see discoloration as well as noticing some taste and odor issues during the transition. 

Water provided by DWSD will contain corrosion control agents to hinder the leaching of lead from old pipes 
into the water; however, the City will also be adding additional corrosion control agents to further minimize the 
risk presented by lead pipes. 

The contract between the City and DWSD calls for the provision of 12.5 million gallons per day (mgd) of 
treated water from Lake Huron at a cost of $ 1 . 1 million per month. DW SD Director Sue McCormick noted that 
the talks between Flint, DWSD and the GLWA Board were very cordial: “everyone acted in a spirt of 
cooperation in order to come to this agreement.” Flint will purchase water from Detroit until the Karegnondi 


l 



Water Authority (KWA) pipeline can be completed in 2016. At that time, the KWA will become the primary 
water source for the City and the Flint River will remain as a backup system. 


Residents with questions or concerns about the hydrant flushing in their area can call the Water Service Center 
at 810-766-7202. Continuing information on water will be provided via the City of Flint’s website, 

cityofflint.com. 


-END- 


-Jason Lorenz 

Public Information Officer 

City of Flint 

(810) 237-2039 (Office) 

■■ II^H(Cell) 

jlorenz@cityoffiint.com 


2 



Jason Lorenz 
Public Information Officer 
Office: (810) 237-2039 
Cell: 

For Immediate Release 

City of Flint Reconnects to Detroit Water 

Flint, Michigan - October 16 , 2015 - Flint has reconnected to Detroit water, reached an 
agreement with the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (DWSD) for the temporary 
provision of treated Lake Huron water to Flint. Work to establish the reconnection will 
begin immediately in a coordinated effort between the City of Flint, Genesee County and 
the DWSD. 

A tremendous effort by all three partners, along with the efforts of the Governor and the 
State Legislature, ensured that this action occurred as quickly as possible. “The money 
from the state to begin fixing Flint water by reconnecting to Detroit is just a start - a down 
payment/ said Mayor Dayne Walling. “I am not going to stop until every drop of drinking 
water in Flint is 100% safe.” 

Detroit water will be introduced into the Flint system throughout the evening. It is expected 
that the thorough replacement from Flint River water to Detroit water will happen after 
approximately three weeks. Residents in Flint may see discoloration as well as noticing 
some taste and odor issues during the transition. 

Water provided by DWSD will contain corrosion control agents to hinder the leaching of 
lead from old pipes into the water; however, the City will also be adding additional 
corrosion control agents to further minimize the risk presented by lead pipes. 

-CONTINUE- 

City Hall 

1 101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 
810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7218 www.citvofflint.com 





The contract between the City and DWSD calls for the provision of 12.5 million gallons 
per day (mgd) of treated water from Lake Huron at a cost of $1 .1 million per month. DWSD 
Director Sue McCormick noted that the talks between Flint, DWSD and the GLWA Board 
were very cordial: “everyone acted in a spirt of cooperation in order to come to this 
agreement.” Flint will purchase water from Detroit until the Karegnondi Water Authority 
(KWA) pipeline can be completed in 201 6. At that time, the KWA will become the primary 
water source for the City and the Flint River will remain as a backup system. 

Residents with questions or concerns about the hydrant flushing in their area can call the 
Water Service Center at 810-766-7202. Continuing information on water will be provided 
via the City of Flint’s website, cityofflint.com. 


-END- 


City Hall 

1 101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 
810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7218 www.citvofflint.com 





From: Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) 

Sent: Sunday, October 18, 2015 3:54 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: Detroit News Flint II 

Attachments: Detroit News Flint ILdocx 


All, 

Need your review of this document. It’s our response to Detroit News story they’re prepping for 
tomorrow. 

Per Sara, Dan will call Jarrod shortly to discuss what we’re proposing to do here. 

Thanks, 

b 


i 



Brad, 


After reviewing the emails made available through FOIA, there are several things that seem to need 
addressing. 

1. It appears DEQ staffers have essentially downplayed or ignored warning signs from EPA's water 
expert, Miguel Deltoral. We have been aware of Mr. Deltoral's unofficial memo that went public 
in April. But his email dated two months earlier on Feb. 27, to Jennifer Crooks and Mike Prysby, 
he seems to lay out exactly what's come to pass... 

"(Particulate lead readings) Folks tend to discount these values as anomalies, but particulate lead 
release is a normal part of the corrosion process and it is universal (common) in all systems. It's just 
that it's not captured as often by the infrequent LCR sampling. If systems are pre-flushing the tap 
the night before collecting LCR compliance samples (MDEQ) still provides these instructions to 
public water systems) this clears particulate lead out of the plumbing and biases the results low by 
eliminating the highest lead values. If systems are pre-flushing and still finding particulate lead, the 
amount of particulate lead in the system can be higher than what is being detected using these 
"pre-flushed" first-draw samples. 

"My point on that was that people are exposed to the particulate lead on a daily basis, but the 
particulate lead is being flushed away before collecting compliance samples which provides false 
assurance to residents about the true lead levels in the water." 

Miguel goes on to address the optimal corrosion control situation in that same Feb 27 email. 

"If I remember correctly, Detroit is feeding (phosphate) for the lead/copper rule, but since Flint 
is no longer part of that interconnection, I was wondering what their OCCT was. They are 
required to have OCCT in place which is why I was asking what they were using." 

So what I'm seeing here is Miguel having raised these issues as far back as February. When 
unofficial April memo shows up, it's clear these issues still haven't been addressed. 

Another email from the day before came from Jennifer Crooks at EPA which also highlights early 
concern about a lack of proper corrosion controls as well as the testing methods. 

"The City can't just flush in advance of taking the compliance samples, they have to flush the 
lines on a regular basis." 

Can you respond to the fact that it appears the state ignored or disregarded several warnings 
from EPA officials about testing deficiencies and insufficient corrosion controls? 

Emails offer snapshots of a much broader conversation. The program staff did not ignore the 
information. They believed they were handling the situation in full accordance with federal 
protocols, and contacted EPA Region 5 officials promptly to seek guidance. They were more 
than halfway done with compliance sampling under the federal protocol and the 90 th percentile 
samples to that point showed 6 pbb - barely in excess of the 5 pbb threshold. 



2. Corrosion control, or the lack thereof, seems to be another major problem here. At the first of 
the recent press conferences, Dan Wyant said that lime was being used as a corrosion control 
method. But that is clearly contradicted by DEQ staff at several points. One of those is Pat 
Cook's email from April 24. 

"Flint is currently not practicing corrosion control treatment at the (water treatment plant)." 

This puts Dan's comments about the lime into question. 

There's been some confusion on this point, and I think it was addressed in our previous 
response. This was a misunderstanding with technical staff. Lime was added to soften the water. 
While it adjusts pH and can have some impact on corrosivity, it was insufficient corrosion 
control. 

3. I gather from several exchanges in here that EPA and DEQ disagree over that the state's 
responsibility was in ensuring there was optimal corrosion control. One of the emails from July 
includes notes from a meeting of all the parties shows that EPA was asking why that hadn't been 
used from the outset, and the state's response was something along these lines: 

""MDEQ explained that they did not treat the switch to Flint River water as a "new system," but 
as a new source. It is their understanding that two rounds of 6-month testing is still needed to 
characterize the water quality. They don't know what optimized is until those two rounds of six month 
monitoring are completed." 

Under the lead copper rule, was the state required to have phosphate treatment in place? It appears 
here that the state chose to interpret the CLR as not requiring corrosion control. That seems like a highly 
dubious conclusion. 

And after concerns were raised repeatedly beginning (at least as early as February), why was nothing 
done? 

What has become clear in recent weeks is that staff believed they were handling the situation in 
accordance with the proper protocol for a water provider using a new source, but the federal Lead and 
Copper rule has a particular provision for communities over 50,000 people; that the system operator 
must continue treating with full corrosion control even as they test the water. 

What the staff did would have been the proper protocol for a community under 50,000 people. None of 
the DEQ staff in this division had ever worked on a water source switch for a community over 50,000 
people - it's uncommon for our big communities to switch sources. 

it's increasingly clear there was confusion here, but it also is increasingly clear that DEQ staff believed 
they were using the proper federal protocol and they were not. 

The Governor will soon announce an independent, third party, after-action review to detail what 
happened and why, and offer steps to make sure Michigan's drinking water program is on a better 
course in the future. 

4. Another area of concern, one I mentioned on the phone, is the pace of response. And I 
understand that the lead copper rule lays out response times. But you have concerns being 
raised about lead by an EPA expert as far back as February. The state's response, in several 
instances, is that federal guidelines give us two six-month periods to collect samples, and then 
more time to submit an action plan, and then a year or more to enact that plan. 

While those delays in making a change may be permitted under the law, given that we're talking 
about a possible public health crisis, why wasn't there more expediency? The responses in these 



emails appear to be without any sense of urgency at a time when Flint residents may have been 
drinking dangerous water. 


The results of two rounds of water testing showed the city needed to move to optimizing its 
corrosion control. That order was issued Aug. 17. 

5. At many points along the way, serious concerns are made about the state's testing methods. 
The Virginia Tech results were not the first time someone had indicated state testing - as 
approved by federal guidelines - might not be giving accurate readings. 

Miguel's April memo reads: "I wanted to follow up on this because Flint has essentially 
not been using any corrosion control treatment since April 30, 2014 and they have (lead 
service lines). Given the very high lead levels found at one home and the pre-flushing 
happening in Flint, I'm worried that the whole town may have much higher lead levels 
than the compliance results indicated, since they are using pre-flushing ahead of their 
compliance sampling." 

There is substantial controversy over the lead and copper rule - the EPA has been working for years on 
ways to update it, and Michigan will be an active part of that conversation going forward. The situation 
in Flint is a snapshot of an issue affecting cities around the state and the nation. More than a dozen 
states use the sampling protocol Michigan uses - that's not a defense of the protocol, but rather an 
indication that even experts on the issue disagree about the most effective testing methods. 

What everyone can agree on is that lead is a serious issue. And I think everyone can agree that when the 
state came to recognize that there could be a health threat in the city, we took appropriate action. We 
are now engaged in an unprecedented effort to protect kids and families in Flint, develop more 
knowledge about what has happened and how people were affected, and take steps to make sure it 
doesn't happen again - in Michigan, or anywhere else. 

All the people who brought this issue forward deserve credit for bringing it to us. Our actions reflected 
inexperience, and our public response to criticism was the wrong tone early in this conversation. But the 
best we can do with the situation going forward is represented in our present course - the Governor's 
plan represents all the suggestions outlined in the draft EPA memo, the Virginia Tech report, and the 
guidance we've gotten from EPA. 

We will learn from this. We will make necessary changes to see to it that our program becomes a 
national leader in protection. 



From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 20, 2015 8:32 AM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Khouri, Nick (TREASURY); Stanton, 

Terry A. (Treasury); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Murray, David 
(GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Subject: RE: Earley Flint Water OpEd-FOR REVIEW AND INPUT 

I know that no one is going to want to do this, but l don't fee! that it is unfair for Darnell to set the record straight. This 
should be a decision for the G, Jarrod and Dan, however, my guess is that Darnell is not going to quietly accept the abuse 
of the Flint people without having his voice heard. 


From:MichelleZdrodowski [maiifo:michejle.zdrodowskl @det roifkl-?..org1 

Sent: Monday, October 19, 2015 5:13 PM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <myeh^ Baird, Richard (GOV) < b airci r.fST ni |C > I Paul 

Conners <ccsnnei^ Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) <Saxt^ Khouri, Nick (TREASURY) 

<!<hou[iAjli®m!sMg.aD,i?oy > ; Stanton, Terry A. (Treasury) < Sts .n OX rr;j c an.jjoyf > ; Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

<Wsrjf.0a.oW: ^c 0 .lL?MRan,.gpv; > ; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfeis(a>michig3n.gov >: Murray, David (GOV) 

< iVj. i i r. r.^.viQ H .is?.r?n Ar- j.t i o = s 0 i 

Cc: Darnell Earley <darpell.ea.dey Kelly Rossman-McKinney <!y;ossm^ 

Subject: Earley Flint Water OpEd-FOR REVIEW AND INPUT 

All, 

Darnell Earley asked that I send you the draft of an OpEd regarding the Flint Water issue that he would like to 
send to the media this week. 

He is seeking your input before sending, and is looking for any feedback you might have by tomorrow 
afternoon. He has intentionally placed it on his EM letterhead as he is still acting in the capacity of an EM. 

Thank you. 

Michelle Z. 

Michelle A. Zdrodowski 

Executive Director of Communications 
Detroit Public Schools 
3011 W. Grand Boulevard, 14th Floor 
Detroit, Ml 48202 
313.873.3238, office 
mobile 


l 



From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 21, 2015 7:50 AM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Subject: Re: Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, Flint After Action 


Will do! 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Oct 21, 2015, at 7:49 AM, Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Agenj@michigan.gov > wrote: 

We need to add him to press release. 

Can one of you do first thing this morning. 

Begin forwarded message: 

Front: "Snyder, Rick (GOV)" 

Date: October 20, 2015 at 7:42:28 PM EDT 
To: "Calley, Brian (GOV)" 

Cc: "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < AgenJ@micbigan.gov >, "Clement, Elizabeth 
(GOV)" < clemente@,michigan.aov > "Scott, Allison (GOV)" 

<scotta 1 2 @,m ichig a n. go v> "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 
< muchmored@mi chi gan . gov > 

Subject: Re: Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, Flint After Action 

Sounds like a great addition. 

Thanks 

Rick 

On Oct 20, 2015, at 6:19 PM, Calley, Brian (GOV) 

wrote: 

I really like that option. 

On Oct 20, 2015, at 5:55 PM, Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AqenJ@michig3n.gov > 
wrote: 

Rich connected with Dr. Lawrence Reynolds from Flint 
to join our After Action team. 

He's been a long time pediatrician in Flint. Well 
respected in the community. 

He was affiliated with Mott Children Health Center for 
several years, but is listed as affiliated with Hurley now. 

His background looks excellent. He is able to join via 
phone tomorrow morning. 

Let me know if any concerns. 

He was suggested by Harvey and vetted by Rich. 


l 




Old bio from 2012 here: 

https://cfgf.org/cfgf/tabld/394/itemid/222/Dr" 

Lawrence-Reynolds-Honored-bv-CFGF.aspx 


Current Listing: 

http://health.usnews.com/doctors/lawrence-reynojds- 

455776 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Murray, David (GOV) 

Wednesday, October 21, 2015 8:32 AM 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

RE: Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, Flint After Action 


Will do. 10 enough? 


From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 21, 2015 8:31 AM 

To: Murray, David (GOV) < Murr3yDl@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Re: Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, Flint After Action 

bring copies of release to the 9am 


On Oct 21, 2015, at 7:50 AM, Murray, David (GOV) <Murrav P 1 @michigan. gov > wrote: 
Will do! 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Oct 21, 2015, at 7:49 AM, Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Age ni @ rnichlgan.gov> wrote: 

We need to add him to press release. 

Can one of you do first thing this morning. 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Snyder, Rick (GOV)" 

Date: October 20, 2015 at 7:42:2^^^^^^^^^^^^^^™ 

To: "Calley, Brian (GOV)" 

Cc: "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < A g e n J @ m ic-h i ga n. go v>. "Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV)" < clemente@.michi gan, gov >. "Scott, Allison 
(GOV)" < scotta 1 2@.tnichi gan, gov >, "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 
<nuiehffiored @ mich iga n.g o v> 

Subject: Re: Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, Flint After Action 

Sounds like a great addition. 

Thanks 

Rick 


On Oct 20, 2015, at 6:19 PM, Calley, Brian (GOV) 


wrote: 


I really like that option. 


1 



On Oct 20, 2015, at 5:55 PM, Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

< AqenJ@michig3n.qov > wrote: 


Rich connected with Dr. Lawrence 
Reynolds from Flint to join our After 
Action team. 

He's been a long time pediatrician in 
Flint. Well respected in the community. 
He was affiliated with Mott Children 
Health Center for several years, but is 
listed as affiliated with Hurley now. 

His background looks excellent. He is 
able to join via phone tomorrow 
morning. 

Let me know if any concerns. 

He was suggested by Harvey and vetted 
by Rich. 


Old bio from 2012 here: 


2 22/D r-tawreoce 


fgf/ta b i d / 394/i te m I d/ 
-R eynoid s-Ho nored- 


by-CFGF.aspx 


Current Listing: 

http://healfh.usnews.com/docfors/iawr 

ence-reynolds-45 5776 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Murray, David (GOV) 

Wednesday, October 21, 2015 8:35 AM 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

RE: Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, Flint After Action 


Is this the actual name of the group? 

Flint Water After Action Report Commission 


From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 21, 2015 8:32 AM 

To: Murray, David (GOV) < MurrayDl@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Re: Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, Flint After Action 

sure 


On Oct 21, 2015, at 8:3 1 AM, Murray, David (GOV) < MurravD I @ni i chigan . gov > wrote: 
Will do. 10 enough? 


From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 21, 2015 8:31 AM 

To: Murray, David (GOV) < MurravPl@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Re: Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, Flint After Action 

bring copies of release to the 9am 


On Oct 21, 2015, at 7:50 AM, Murray, David (GOV) <Murra v D 1 @m ichig a n. go v> wrote: 


Will do! 

Sent from my iPhone 

On Oct 21, 2015, at 7:49 AM, Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Agen J @michi mn. gov > 
wrote: 


We need to add him to press release. 

Can one of you do first thing this morning. 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Snyder, Rick (GOV)" 


l 


Date: October 20, 2015 at 7:42:28 PMEDT 
To: "Galley, Brian (GOV)" 

Cc: "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" 

< A gen J @.m i chi gan. gov >. "Clement, Elizabeth 
(GOV)" <clemente @ mi chi g a n . go v>, " Scott, 

Allison (GOV)" < scotta 1 2@michigan.gov >, 

"Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 

<mu chmored @: michi gan. go v> 

Subject: Re: Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, Flint After 
Action 

Sounds like a great addition. 

Thanks 

Rick 


On Oct 20, 2015, at 6:19 PM, Calley, 
Brian (GOV) 


I really like that option. 

On Oct 20, 2015, at 5:55 PM, Agen, Jarrod 
(GOV) < Aoen Jjgtrrtichiqsn. csov > wrote: 

Rich connected with Dr. 
Lawrence Reynolds 
from Flint to join our 
After Action team. 

He's been a long time 
pediatrician in Flint. 

Well respected in the 
community. 

He was affiliated with 
Mott Children Health 
Center for several 
years, but is listed as 
affiliated with Hurley 
now. 

His background looks 
excellent. He is able to 
join via phone 
tomorrow morning. 

Let me know if any 
concerns. 

He was suggested by 
Harvey and vetted by 
Rich. 

Old bio from 2012 here: 

htt ps: //cfgf.org/cfgf/t3 

bid/3 94 /i t e mid / 22 2/D r- 

2 


wrote: 



Lawrence-Reynoids- 

Hortored-by-CFGF.aspx 

Current Listing: 

http://heaith.usnews.c 

om/doctors/iawrence- 

reynoids-455776 


3 





From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:35 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Baird, 

Richard (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: FW: state money for detroit water 

Importance: High 


Please see below. 

No good deed goes unpunished. This looks like may be next big issue. 

I thought GLWA- DWSD was NOT going to require the entire sum ail up front? 


From: Ronald Fonger fmaiito:RFONGERlgPm!ive.com1 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:28 AM 
To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < W u rfeis @ michjgan . gov > 

Subject: state money for detroit water 

Sara: 

I was at a City Council meeting last night when Flint City Administrator Natasha Henderson said the state has only wired 
Flint $2 million of the $6 million approved by the state Legislature. 

She said the city has been told it will receive an additional $2 million in January and another $2 million in April. 
Henderson said she's asked that the money be sent immediately because the city was required to pay Detroit the entire 
$12 million upfront, before the water was reconnected, and its water and sewer fund balance has dropped significantly 
as a result. 

Several council members also spoke about this, and Council President Josh Freeman called the payment plant "beyond 
ridiculous" given the city's financial position. 

Is there someone who can talk to us about this? 

Thanks, 


Ron Fonger 
MLive Media Group 
Reporter 

mobile BE9P5SS3 

email rfongerl@mlive.com 

address 540 S. Saginaw St. #101, Flint Ml 48502 


1 



From: 

Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: 

Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:43 AM 

To: 

Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod 
(GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: 

Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: 

RE: state money for detroit water 


The deal was monthly payments. I will get into this as quick as i can but I am sure she has it wrong or someone in DWSD 
is befuddled. 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:35 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: FW: state money for detroit water 
Importance: High 

Please see below. 

No good deed goes unpunished. This looks like may be next big issue. 

I thought GLWA-DWSD was NOT going to require the entire sum all up front? 


From: Ronald Fonger [mailto:RrONGERl@mlive.CQm1 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:28 AM 
To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wurfei s@ michi g an. g ov> 

Subject: state money for detroit water 

Sara: 

I was at a City Council meeting last night when Flint City Administrator Natasha Henderson said the state has only wired 
Flint $2 million of the $6 million approved by the state Legislature. 

She said the city has been told it will receive an additional $2 million in January and another $2 million in April. 
Henderson said she's asked that the money be sent immediately because the city was required to pay Detroit the entire 
$12 million upfront, before the water was reconnected, and its water and sewer fund balance has dropped significantly 
as a result. 

Several council members also spoke about this, and Council President Josh Freeman called the payment plant "beyond 
ridiculous" given the city's financial position. 

Is there someone who can talk to us about this? 

Thanks, 


Ron Fonger 
Mlive Media Group 
Reporter 


l 



mobile | 
email rf 
address 


540 S. Saginaw St. #101, Flint Ml 48502 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:55 AM 
Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

RE: state money for detroit water 


i can ~ but ! need to have the facts and details first. This whole issue is one that we cannot afford to be wrong on. 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:47 AM 
To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfeis@rniehigan.gov > 
Subject: RE: state money for detroit water 


Push back hard on this. Natasha Henderson is becoming a liability. 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:35 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muebmored@michigan.gov >; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) < eiemente@miehigan.gov >; 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Agenj(aimichiKan.gov >: Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@micbigan.gov >: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 
< hoi!insh@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) < MurravPl@michigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: state money for detroit water 
Importance: High 


Please see below. 


No good deed goes unpunished. This looks like may be next big issue. 

I thought GLWA-DWSD was NOT going to require the entire sum ail up front? 


From: Ronald Fonger [mailto:RFONGERl@mlive.com1 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:28 AM 
To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfeis@rnichigan.gov > 

Subject: state money for detroit water 

Sara: 

I was at a City Council meeting last night when Flint City Administrator Natasha Henderson said the state has only wired 
Flint $2 million of the $6 million approved by the state Legislature. 

She said the city has been told it will receive an additional $2 million in January and another $2 million in April. 
Henderson said she's asked that the money be sent immediately because the city was required to pay Detroit the entire 
$12 million upfront, before the water was reconnected, and its water and sewer fund balance has dropped significantly 
as a result. 

Several council members also spoke about this, and Council President Josh Freeman called the payment plant "beyond 
ridiculous" given the city's financial position. 

Is there someone who can talk to us about this? 

Thanks, 


l 



MLive Media Group 
Reporter 


mobile | 
email n 
address 


: ongerl(g>miive.conri 

540 S. Saginaw St. #101, Flint Ml 48502 



From: 

Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: 

Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:58 AM 

To: 

Baird, Richard (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: 

Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: 

RE: state money for detroit water 


Thanks much that was the last i had knew and understood too about how was supposed to work, 
just trying to either correct and nip in bud ASAP before this gets out of hand. 

But also imperative that we have facts first, 

P-s. 

Have also talked with Treasury and SBO teams and they're looking into from their respective ends as well. 


From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:43 AM 

To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wurfeis@michigan.gov>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <rriuchmored@michigan.gov>: Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV) <dement e@ michi g an. g ov>: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <Ageni@roicbigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 
<hoHinsh@michigari.gov> 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) < IVIurravDl@michigan. g ov> 

Subject: RE: state money for detroit water 

The deal was monthly payments, i will get into this as quick as i can but 1 am sure she has it wrong or someone in DWSD 
is befuddled. 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:35 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: FW: state money for detroit water 

Importance: High 


Please see below. 


No good deed goes unpunished. This looks like may be next big issue. 


I thought 6LWA-DWSD was NOT going to require the entire sum all up front? 


From: Ronald Fonger [mailto:RrQNGERl@mjiv6.coml 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:28 AM 
To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wurfeis@michi g an.gov> 
Subject: state money for detroit water 


l 



Sara: 

I was at a City Council meeting last night when Flint City Administrator Natasha Henderson said the state has only wired 
Flint $2 million of the $6 million approved by the state Legislature. 

She said the city has been told it will receive an additional $2 million in January and another $2 million in April. 
Henderson said she's asked that the money be sent immediately because the city was required to pay Detroit the entire 
$12 million upfront, before the water was reconnected, and its water and sewer fund balance has dropped significantly 
as a result. 

Several council members also spoke about this, and Council President Josh Freeman called the payment plant "beyond 
ridiculous" given the city's financial position. 

Is there someone who can talk to us about this? 

Thanks, 


Ron Fonger 
MLive Media Group 
Reporter 

mobile ■■■■■■■■ 

email rfQngerl@mlive.com 

address 540 S. Saginaw St. #101, Flint Ml 48502 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 


Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Thursday, October 22, 2015 12:16 PM 

Baird, Richard (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Murray, David (GOV) 

RE: state money for detroit water 


Importance: 


High 


So sounds like based on conf call that was just had, that for some reason the city did indeed agree to all up front. 

Clearly don't want to throw city under the bus as that's certainly not going help situation, but since having them do that 
to us as has already started, please see below bullets. Tact based and shows state's immediate action to again help 
address. Work? Any concerns or changes? 

« The initial agreement and understanding was for rnonthly payments. 

® Unbeknownst to the state, the city entered into an arrangement for one upfront sum and payment. 

® Now that we are aware of this and have confirmed that final arrangement, the state is taking steps to immediately 
wire the money to the city. They should have all of the state funds within a business day or two. 

Please weigh in ASAP. 

Thanks much, 

SW 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:58 AM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@michigan.gov >; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michigan.gov >; Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV) < demente@michigan.gov >; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Agenj@michigan.gov >; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

< hoiiinsh@michiRan.gov > 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) < MurrayDl@michigan.gov > 

Subject: RE: state money for detroit water 

Thanks much - that was the last i had knew and understood too about how was supposed to work. 


just trying to either correct and nip in bud ASAP before this gets out of hand. 


But also imperative that we have facts first. 


p.s. 

Have also talked with Treasury and SBO teams and they're looking into from their respective ends as well. 


From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:43 AM 

To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfeis@michigan.gov >; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@pnichigan.gov >; Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV) < demente@michigan.gov >; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Agenj@snichigan.gov >; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 
< holiinsh@michiRan.gov > 


l 



Cc: Murray, David (GOV) < M u rra v D 1 @ m ichigan.gov > 
Subject: RE: state money for detroit water 


The deal was monthly payments. I will get into this as quick as i can but I am sure she has it wrong or someone in DWSD 
is befuddled. 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:35 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: FW: state money for detroit water 

Importance: High 


Please see below. 


No good deed goes unpunished. This looks like may be next big issue. 

I thought GLWA-DWSD was NOT going to require the entire sum all up front? 


From: Ronald Fonger [mailto:RFONGERl@mlive.com1 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:28 AM 
To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfeis@michigan.gov > 

Subject: state money for detroit water 

Sara: 

I was at a City Council meeting last night when Flint City Administrator Natasha Henderson said the state has only wired 
Flint $2 million of the $6 million approved by the state Legislature. 

She said the city has been told it will receive an additional $2 million in January and another $2 million in April. 
Henderson said she's asked that the money be sent immediately because the city was required to pay Detroit the entire 
$12 million upfront, before the water was reconnected, and its water and sewer fund balance has dropped significantly 
as a result. 

Several council members also spoke about this, and Council President Josh Freeman called the payment plant "beyond 
ridiculous" given the city's financial position. 

Is there someone who can talk to us about this? 

Thanks, 


Ron Fonger 
MLive Media Group 
Reporter 


mobile 

email rfongerl@mlive.com 

address 540 S. Saginaw St. #101, Flint Ml 48502 


2 



From: 

Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: 

Thursday, October 22, 2015 12:33 PM 

To: 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: 

Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: 

RE: state money for detroit water 


That's a great point and change. 


From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 12:30 PM 

To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wurfels@michigan.gov>; Baird, Richard (GOV) <bairdr@michigan.gov>; Muchmore, Dennis 
(GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov>; Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 
<hollinsh@michigan.gov> 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) <MurrayDl@michigan.gov> 

Subject: RE: state money for detroit water 

Overall it works for me. 

Although, just add some urgency/compassion. 


® We want to ensure that there are no complications or interruptions in Flint residents receiving water from 
GWLA, so we are taking steps immediately wire the money to the city. They should have ail of the state funds 
within a business day or two. 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 12:16 PM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@michigan.gov >: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michiKan.gov >: Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV) < demente@michigan.gov >; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@miehigan.gov >: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 
< honinsh@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) < MurrayDl@michigan.gov > 

Subject: RE: state money for detroit water 

Importance: High 


So sounds like based on conf call that was just had, that for some reason the city did indeed agree to all up front. 


Clearly don't want to throw city under the bus as that's certainly not going help situation, but since having them do that 
to us as has already started, please see below bullets. Fact based and shows state's immediate action to again help 
address. Work? Any concerns or changes? 


* The initial agreement and understanding was for monthly payments. 

® Unbeknownst to the state, the city entered into an arrangement for one upfront sum and payment. 

• Now that we are aware of this and have confirmed that final arrangement, the state is taking steps to immediately 
wire the money to the city. They should have all of the state funds within a business day or two. 


Please weigh in ASAP. 


l 



Thanks much, 
SW 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:58 AM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@michigan.gov >: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michigan.gov >; Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV) < dertiente@michigan.gQy >; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@miehigan.gov >; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 
< honinsh@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) < M u rra v D 1 @ m i ch iga n . gov > 

Subject: RE: state money for detroit water 


Thanks much - that was the last i had knew and understood too about how was supposed to work. 


Just trying to either correct and nip in bud ASAP before this gets out of hand. 


But also imperative that we have facts first 


p,s. 

Have also talked with Treasury and SBO teams and they're looking into from their respective ends as weii. 


From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:43 AM 

To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfeis@michigan.gov >; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michigan.gov >: Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV) < ciernente@michigan.gov >: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigan.gov >: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 
< hoiiinsh@mgchigan.gov > 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) < M u rra v D 1 @ m i ch i ga n . gov > 

Subject: RE: state money for detroit water 


The deal was monthly payments. I wiSi get into this as quick as ! can but ! am sure she has it wrong or someone in DWSD 
is befuddled. 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:35 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: FW: state money for detroit water 

Importance: High 


Please see below. 


No good deed goes unpunished. This looks like may be next big issue. 


I thought GLWA-DWSD was NOT going to require the entire sum all up front? 


From: Ronald Fonger [m aiito:RFONGERl @ miive.com1 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:28 AM 
To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfeis@michigan.gov > 
Subject: state money for detroit water 


2 



Sara: 

I was at a City Council meeting last night when Flint City Administrator Natasha Henderson said the state has only wired 
Flint $2 million of the $6 million approved by the state Legislature. 

She said the city has been told it will receive an additional $2 million in January and another $2 million in April. 
Henderson said she's asked that the money be sent immediately because the city was required to pay Detroit the entire 
$12 million upfront, before the water was reconnected, and its water and sewer fund balance has dropped significantly 
as a result. 

Several council members also spoke about this, and Council President Josh Freeman called the payment plant "beyond 
ridiculous" given the city's financial position. 

Is there someone who can talk to us about this? 

Thanks, 


Ron Fonger 
MLive Media Group 
Reporter 

mobile 

email rfQngerl@mlive.com 

address 540 S. Saginaw St. #101, Flint Ml 48502 


3 


Scott, Allison (GOV) 

Wednesday, October 28, 2015 3:08 PM 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
FW: Flint water 


Thoughts? 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:34 AM 
To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

Cc: Scott, Allison (GOV) < seottal2@triichigast.gov > 

Subject: Flint water 

Ananich wants you to add Carl Levin to the task force on Flint Water. You might want to consider that. Carl isn't going 
to go to every meeting, he's a pretty fair individual with a long relationship with Sikkema and Kolb, and, Ananich can 
hardly balk at the findings if Carl is inside the tent. 


l 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Tuesday, November 10, 2015 5:01 PM 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Hollins, 
Harvey (GOV) 

Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) 

FW: Article 

American City and County.pdf 


FYI, We had a productive first meeting with Mayor Weaver of Flint today. We hear lots of second hand rumors but are 
proceeding to aggressively assist the City and Mayor with this transition. Let me know if you would like any more 
Information. 

Wayne L. Workman 
Deputy State Treasurer 
Michigan Department of Treasury 


From: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Sent: Tuesday, November 10, 2015 4:52 PM 

To: 'kweaver@cityofflint.com' <kwea ver@cityoff]int,com > 

Cc: Byrne, Randall (Treasury) <ByrneRl@ml chigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: Article 

Mayor Weaver, Thank you again for coming to Lansing for our meeting. It was very good to welcome you and begin 
what will be a productive working relationship. Attached is the article on water in the US I mentioned. I expect we will 
be talking early next week. In the meantime, please do not hesitate to call me. Thank you, Wayne 

Wayne L. Workman 
Deputy State Treasurer 
Michigan Department of Treasury 


From: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) 

Sent: Tuesday, November 10, 2015 11:11 AM 

To: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) < WorkrnanW@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Byrne, Randall (Treasury) < ByrneRl@m=chigan.gov >; Sampson, Jeremy (TREASURY) < SampsonJ@michig3n.gov : 
Subject: FW: Article 


From: Pleyte, Beth (Treasury) 

Sent: Monday, November 09, 2015 4:27 PM 

To: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) < SaxtonT@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Article 


l 



Executive Assistant to 

Tom Saxton, Chief Deputy Treasure 

430 West Allegan St. 

Lansing, Ml 48922 
i re 

517-373-3223 Office 




Snovy anti; i cei'renutya: p:.5s:t i 
from anw5 the counts v 


fv'i ihvao it ?o !y/a s i t : vv , > t e r p 1 a r i t n ex 6 hi ii. 
urihksly tourist attraction 


AMERICAN 


Servi 


eernment leaders since 1909 


October 2015 


tllllll 


Penton 


* ^ • X > * v'V ' 


gSST-E£SS? Hi SHXSNin 
JS KsSS'HS H Sit 
„ m M58 

???* T 900 suoo ? 338 tm 

sJin 38 #S 3 ? 9 (?£ 68 S 8 ij 

tiUM f J3i«HK3S 





By Derek Prai! 



■ 

ti 


ll 

' ' 


lined underneath Americas homes, 
businesses and schools there's 
a problem steadily growing, it 
threatens our economy, our safety 
and our way of life. The problem is 
mounting, there are few actively 
working to solve it, and in many cases, we don't . ■ 
know where it is until something goes wrong. 

There are nearly 170,000 public: drinking water 
systems. 14,780 wastewater treatment, facilities and 
19,740 wastewater pipe systems crisscrossing the 
American landscape. However, this infrastructure is 
aging, deteriorating, crumbling u and if immediate- 
action isn't taken, the results could be catastrophic. 

The American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) in its 
most recent Report Card for America’s Infrastructure 
gave both the country’s drinking and wastewater 
infrastructure a grade of D, The organization 
estimates that it will take nearly $300 billion in capital 
investment over the nest 20 years to get waste and 
stormwater systems up to date, while the cost of 
replacing every drinking water pipe past Its useful 
life in this country could well exceed SI trillion. 

THE RISING WATERS 

Wafer infrastructure is a huge collective term, and 
refers to everything from underground water mains to 
wastewater treatment plants and everything in between; 
however, Greg DiLoreto, farmer ASCE president, 
says, generally speaking, the biggest budgetary 
shortfall is in maintaining the country's underground 
network of pipes, many of which are over a century 
old or more. Washington D.C.’s system, for example, 
was installed shortly after the Civil War, he says. 

“There are an estimated 240,000 water main 
year here in the United States," 


DiLoreto says, adding, “quite frankly, there’s not 
enough revenue to do what needs to be done to 
htirsg that drinking water infrastructure to a ; ; 
grade of B, which would be good condition ■ : ■ 

And this isn’t a new problem. Investment: in 
America's water infrastructure Iras lagged for 
decades, “We had a great boom in the post-war 
era ofi caking up our Infrastructure’ says Tracy- 
Mehan, executive director of governmental affairs 
at the American Water Works A w-r ia?.u>p b >t 
we’ve not continued investing in it to maintain it.’ 
:l‘th**e systems are not maintained, it conSd result 
■ m catastrophic consequences. Costly and wasteful 
mam breaks will become the norm, and the reliability 
of onr nation s water supply will quickly deteriorate. 
-Experts agree t hat not addressing the problem would 
spell disaster for i he economy and Way of life. So, 
why then is little being done to solve the problem? 

One contributing factor is that water in America 
is unrealistically inexpensive. By and large, the 
revenue governments receive from water services is 
from the rats payers; however, they only pay half of 
whet most pay for water in developed countries in 
Europe, says Mehan. And DiLoreto agrees. Water is 
incredibly dump when compared to any other service 
that comes rnto the average American home, such as 
cable TV, broadband Internet or cellphone service. 

Consumers tend to take their water for granted, 
Mehart says. He argues that this maybe because of 
an attitude most Americans have regarding wafer 
they view it as a right, rather than a service, he 
says. “At the end of the day, someone has to pay for 
the distribution systems, the treatment works, and 
all the other things that make water potable," lie 
says. Citizens lose sight of the fact that water isn't a 
simple commodity; “What: we re selling, if you cab 

emencandtyandcounty.com :j October 201 S ! 



F xpK •('$ '.'AvAsvttfi s- ~ -'Cirwem Snd lb -.fc<"0 \\W '' T r fttfUi u s 

’1 < p 1 5 || *".» Tt 'in> t‘ k *ji;i auc< • .12. -u 


i-.H" 


V.O'.i. as 


iPifi^Si 


T:'i- UwfJ rives of %sw n t«:n|i;myp« 


use that terra,* he adds, % a very sophisticated. council to talk about potential rate hikes can be a 

highly, engineered capital-intensive service." -fraught conversation, and not always purely a business 

The question, Mehan says, comes down to who decision. “The electoral cycle sometimes intrudes u:j o 

will end up paying for it. "More and more, were these decisions and can create barriers he says, 

going to be looking to rate payers to shoulder the Ihe second issue is more tangible. DiLoreto: 

responsibility, which will, of course, be controversial adds that visibility is a major contributing factor, ■ 

and will also raise some serious questions about “Unfortunately, until it breaks, we as consumers don't . 

affordability,' he says. “Hates will continue to go up." really think about it,” ha says. ” We turn on the tap 

Which leads to a major issue. It. is, of course, politically and water comes out, clean to drink, in every faucet 
unpopular to raise rates. "Polities has something to do in our house. We just don't think about it until we gel: 

with it," Mehan explains, “and I don’t mean politics in a notice from the utility that says the water system 

the partisan sense “ Most water systems are municipally will be down because we have a broken pipe." 
based, and lie explains that going to a mayor or 

=3::: . = THE CAVALRY ISN’T COM ! NO 

lil; ,1 j: ... wd i ' . T. : \ | ||||I| • ■ • ...: r 

' communities can work to make 

their water systems more reliable 

wwos is bv adopting a meaningful asset 

ta»«n«OT .• . management program, DiLoreto 

<v^v, system, knowing where problems 

».-d«, may occur and engaging In regularly 

mbwincjiw w««* ! scheduled preventative maintenance : 

can greatly reduce risks, he says, 

technologies andpom^terize^s^it ^ 
management systems, ha says, hove 

SSCiKvfesS -ttUsfisxfej if,. “ «,» . . 

made this process more efbcient, 

Anni-hf-r !»« fBnaihfp wav nf 

eS£feUS&lfi,&xajl- f>*xww,;oxr Is&bi sdfcseossees Snn fcw TfofassleRe Vj &reM4nfesi&rca£!$ftaal s 

addressing the issue, is through policy. 

In 201-1, about Si 3? billion in public 
funds was spent on water inlrastfuetbre 
and resources, says Joseph Kane, a 

"W'd.v ,sma.w« senior policy analyst for The Brookings ,. 

ssiiKswxw m~m Institution, citing a study released pyTiU 

»w;sUs»W{!i».ssss — «osssa-9S8 «cfjciwi® sts .the Congressional Budget Office (C80). 

. -ssisssess si®s!£s~ s«ss«»tau sssU sssssokkj -as- And while- some of this is made up of 

ws^ 'ssxBis ; T ; f ' I :; m federal dollars, about 75 percent comes 

-W SC- If OTO Sfv.tO aSld It* 'ii! gOVCnmieOtS. 

soctoswsasrsKifcsi *.-ks ^wayiaii. ' s« ■;; Because of this, Kane says, these 

E ' ' ' jv ri." v ' public entities that are struggling to 

- ' " ' '' ' """ ~~ simply maintain their water systems 


October 2055 ' amcricanotyafidcounty com 



m 


SSS^ipS^iSSi 

m 




ci *■) 'li .ii <v:- ft/- J Ki - tni:.. : ...i.ti ;n 

•' -’l-' • •' ' " j; j j j j j j j j j j j j j j j j : : ! 


k>\\\v! 


m the way they spend money, 

; "I think a lot of people are 
looking for these top-level silver 
bullet solutions from the top 
down - [thinking] the federal 
government is going to load, and 


huge stiinuiws-style packages to 
solve the challenge." Kane says. 

“1 think if anything has become 
evident over the past few years... 
is that a lot of states a nd localities ; 
realise they're on their own.” . 

The cavalry, so to speak, isn't 
coining to save the day, Kane says, 
States and local governments 
heed to face the problem head on, 
and in order to do that, they must 
think outside traditional boxes. 

One way to do this is through 
regulating efficiencies, Kane says. 
Industry- and household-level 
changes in technology can make j 
a wafer system more efficient 
and resilient, while changes : 
in irrigation and landscaping 
techniques can reduce strain 
on the system. He also says 
looking to the private sector is 
becoming increasingly popular. 

"It's kind of this all-hands-on- 
deck strategy that's coming from 
the bottom up," Kane says. It's not 
just publicly fed and driven, but it's 
increasingly done in partnership 
'with private sector players." 

However, local governments 
need to start rethinking the way 
they go about establishing these ■ 




P;ovicfiiw} Asiti-sticsliy Phasing Coromaraa; : Ogtf Fnxiucis 


S««Nlt f^S SijpWIWf 


:assfes?als: 

....hw. 


A public works official working on \ 
a water main ir. EHuibeth. A f/ , 


_•>» r - « tV ^ 


October 2015 1 3 mefkancityandcou 0 ty.com. 








;*i^' { **** C «a:©i» j ****>? Spotiau 




"> » 


imam 


belson.com/966 


beIson.com/966 


that guides the way governments plan 

and finance infrastructure projects ; tsso£>xsm: 

than the assets themselves 

infrastructure projects, says Kane. 

Today's procurement systems were ^ 

developed for a less connected. 

slower-paced world. Outdated laws, : & ^ m ** 88 ^ » “ 985 * 

burdensome regulator}’ frameworks, S8? ®®®* 8 &o»&«tea 

poor communication and lack of i ss*».sms<»i««»* i*«m csotsw *** 

universal practices hinder growth and ' 

hobble progress. Visionary leadership, a ^jj figures via me American Sociery of Civil Engineers’ Failure to Act report 

talented pool of private and public sector 

professionals, standardization between ' , : . Schilling says that part of Smart Growth America s 

agencies and increased collaboration will make a local advocacy, particularly as it pertains to water 
governments public private partnerships more effective, infrastructure, has centered on State Revolving Loan 
But bow should ! infrastructure projects be Funds, or a fund administered by a state government 

selected? Elisabeth Schilling, deputy director of to provide low-interest loans for investments in wafer 

policy development and implementation for Smart and sanitation infrastructure. Projects must meet 

Growth Amedca, says a “Fix it First" mentality certain criteria for these loans, and developing these 

should be at tire forefront of civic leaders' minds, c riteria in a smart , 


sustainable way is important to the i 


k®M 


smenrancityaivdcoMnty.com ; October 2015; 











Mi 




|||§^ 


111 

MNPfc 

mhMk 


VsfVET 


BOLSTER] NC THE LEVEES 
JL Christian Bolhvage, the mayor 
of Elisabeth, N.I., is working to 
keep his city's infrastructure afloat 
- both hter&ilv and figuratively. 
iMii&Bethjust eelehratEf its35Qth 
birthday," Bollwage says. “ Ihat 
being said, out infrastructure 


future of Americas water infrastructure, she says. 

One of the biggest issues is that there are lots of 
program * available geared toward helping communities 
; expand, Schilling says. “There are fewer programs 
that help communities pay for [this expansion) 
afterwards. A lot of our infrastructure policies arc 
sort of post WWH, trying to help communities 
keep up with the pace of suburbanization." : 

Ibe problem, she says, is that it was expected the 

growth would end up paying for 

: | the costs of maintenance on these 
i I rapidly expanding systems. In 
: | realityr though, that hasn't been : ; : : 
| the case. “Wo haven't raised the 
! | taxes, we haven't Imposed the fees 
: | that will pay for the maintenance 
: | of sewer and water,” she says. 

; | Given the challenges most : 
i I communities face in this regard. 

: l Schilling says a “Fix it First" i : k 
1 policy is the most prudent. 

: 1 “Ihe idea is that you should 
i 1 prioritize maintenance and 
I repair of fisting infrastructure,* 

: ] she says. “And, in some cases, 

| expansion of infrastructure that 
! supports existing communities ■ 
-which is a very Bne distinction, 

I but it has big impacts.” 

I And while the Fix it First water 
I policies Smart Growth America 
1 advocates are geared mostly 
: ;i f I towards setting the criteria for 
: state revolving funds. Schilling 
> says the philosophy can certainly 

f be applied at the local level. In 

I fact, she says it may be easier 
; for local lenders to apply this 
■ mindset because they have the 
i | best idea of where the priorities 
i are. “This is something local 
i | governments need to lead on.” 
i; i So, where are local leaders 
I making headway against 
' die mounting problems? 



is well over 100 years old." The age of the system, and 

the fact that it combines both wastewater and sewer 

water has been among the city's greatest challenger 
Complicating matters ss Elizabeth’s geography. •• 
Sitting m the Arthur Kill a tidal strait separating 
Staten Island, MX, from mainland New jersey, the 
.majority of the dty is below sea level, sv any time there 
is expansion in the city, flooding is a very rea! problem.; 

A recent example of flood control efforts, Bolhvage i 
shares, was along Verona Avenue where the city had 
to install a 1 mi thon- gallon underwater retainer.tahk 
to keep stormwaters from flooding streets, businesses f 
and homes. “We had to dig up a 
whole neighborhood ~ without 
lev,’ interest [state revolving 
fund] loans, we wouldn’t ■ 
have been abte to do this." 

Outside the-box thinking and 
partnerships with public entities 
have also helped Elizabeth in 
replacing infrastructure. PSE&G, 
the local electric utility, has plans 
to replace underground power lines; 
in the city. They want to rust it 
right on the sewer line," Bolhvage 
says. “The problem is when the)’ 
dig up the streets and they start 
running their cable, they’re going 
to crack the sewer lines end its 
going to interfere with & lot of 
residential property.’ Bollwsge is 
working on an agreement where 
the power company will replace g 
the lines they encounter during 
their construction - creating : 
significant cost savings for the city. 

When the infrastructure is as 
old as Elizabeth's "it would be 
impossible to do it without smart 
partners like this,” Bollwage says, 

■■ Ibis creativity is 1 nip or tant in 
■Elizabeth and across the country 
in solving the problems related to 
water Infrastructure. Creativity 
and speed, Bollv/age says, are 
key to ensuring a city’s water 
system functions, as if should, 

“The public has no patience for : 
failed infrastructure “ he says : 

.When there is a problem, the city 
mast be swift in resolving It, 

To this end, he says lib important 
to remain vigilant and have 
■open lines of communication 
with residents and public works : 
personnel if a basement is flooded, 
the local government needs to hi: 


know before it spreads, if depressions in the roadways 
are appearing after a thaw, that can be indicative : ; 
of cracked pipes beneath the surface As difficult as 
it Ss.BoIlwxige says it’s important to stay one stop 
ahead of problems, befote they become disasters.: 

Ha adds St.’s important for rivfe leaders to work hand 
in-band with them stale and federal counterparts to- 
■ensure the availability of funding programs to “ensure 
cities and counties to this country can deal with the 
8H>st Importan t aspect of daily hie ~ that » getting 
clean water into the House and wastewater out* » 



X-tf 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 


Subject: 

Attachments: 


Anderson, Madhu (DEQ) 

Tuesday, November 17, 2015 11:20 AM 
Ken Sikkema (ksikkema@pscinc.com) 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Weber, Travis 
(GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Lyon, Nick 
(DHHS) 

Privileged Attorney-Client Communication - Outline of Flint Drinking Water Issues 
DEQ's Outline of Flint Drinking Water Issues for Flint Water Task Force - Attorney 
Client Privilege Work Product -ll-16-2015.pdf 


Ken - Attached is the outline of the Flint Drinking Water issue (in a question and answer format) we have prepared for you to share 
with your colleagues on the Governor’s Flint Water Task Force. Please let me know if we can provide any other material in preparation 
for the meeting tomorrow. 



Madhu K. Anderson 

Depu ty Director, Economic and Strat egic initiatives 
D<i andersonm30@michioan.gov 



i 


Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


City of Flint Drinking Water 
Outline prepared by the 

Michigan Department of Environmental Quality for the 
Flint Water Task Force 


I. INTRODUCTION 

This document is intended to provide an overview of Michigan’s implementation of 
the Safe Drinking Water Act, 1976 PA 399, as amended (Act 399), with respect to 
events in the city of Flint (City), Michigan. 

II. BACKGROUND 

1 . How has Flint historically obtained its drinking water? 

The water system in the City was organized and built under private ownership in 
1 883 as the Flint Water Works Company to pump raw water from the Flint River to 
their consumers. In 1903, the system was converted to a municipally-owned 
corporation which supplied drinking water to the City. In 1 967, the City became a 
customer of the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (DWSD) system. 

After the switch to DWSD, the City operated its water treatment plant as a standby 
plant for purposes of reliability in the event of an emergency, such as an interruption 
in service of the single pipeline from DWSD. In the last ten years, the water 
treatment plant was used as an emergency backup during two weeks in 2009: 

June 18 through June 20 and September 10 through September 13. 

As a backup emergency water treatment plant, the City was required to operate the 
water treatment plant quarterly to demonstrate the capability to produce drinking 
water in accordance with Act 399 and to keep mechanical equipment (such as 
valves, rubber seals, etc.) in good working order. Each quarter, the water treatment 
plant was test run and samples were taken of both raw water and finished water 
(post-filters). Since the water treatment plant was upgraded in the early 2000s, 
monitoring showed that the water treatment plant was performing as designed. 

Contractual obligations with DWSD did not allow treated water to be put into the 
City’s distribution system during these test runs. Treated water was discharged to 
the Flint River in accordance with a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
(NPDES) Permit. The test runs were for demonstration purposes, to keep the water 
treatment plant operational, and staff familiar with operation in the event it was 
needed in an emergency. 

2. What State and Federal laws or rules exist to ensure safe drinking water is 
provided to City residents? 

The federal Safe Drinking Water Act (federal SDWA) is the primary law that ensures 
the quality of Americans' drinking water. Under the federal SDWA, the United States 
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) sets standards for drinking water quality 
and oversees the states, localities, and water suppliers who implement those 
standards. 


1 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


The federal SDWA was originally passed by Congress in 1974 to protect public 
health by regulating the nation's public drinking water supply. The law was amended 
in 1986 and 1996 and requires many actions to protect drinking water and its 
sources: rivers, lakes, reservoirs, springs, and ground water wells. (The federal 
SDWA does not regulate private wells which serve fewer than 25 individuals.) 

Originally, the federal SDWA focused primarily on treatment as the means of 
providing safe drinking water at the tap. The 1 996 amendments greatly enhanced 
the existing law by recognizing source water protection, operator training, funding for 
water system improvements, and public information as important components of safe 
drinking water. This approach ensures the quality of drinking water by protecting it 
from source to tap. 

The most direct oversight of water systems is conducted by state drinking water 
programs. States can apply to the USEPA for “primacy,” - the authority to implement 
the federal SDWA within their jurisdictions - if they will adopt standards at least as 
stringent as the USEPA’s and enforce those standards. Michigan adopted the Safe 
Drinking Water Act in 1976 through Act 399 and has maintained primacy for the 
program since that time. 

3. What is the USEPA’s role as a regulatory agency in implementing the SDWA? 

Federal and state governments share responsibility for administering drinking water 
programs. Under the federal SDWA, the USEPA is given the responsibility for 
developing national standards and regulations that apply to the nation’s public 
drinking water systems and enforcing those standards, by working with states. 

Michigan’s drinking water program is evaluated annually by the USEPA for 
compliance with the federal SDWA. Based upon these evaluations, the USEPA 
continues to find Michigan’s drinking water program to be compliant with the federal 
SDWA. 

4. What is the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality’s (DEQ) role as a 
regulatory agency in implementing the SDWA? 

The federal SDWA permits states to accept oversight of the drinking water program 
under an agreement with the USEPA giving states primary enforcement 
responsibilities (or primacy). In addition to this delegation of federal authority to the 
states, states also have the power to create additional regulations and programs 
governing drinking water suppliers through their own legislative and regulatory 
processes. Michigan has had regulatory authority of public water supplies since 
1913 (Waterworks and Sewerage Systems, 1913 PA 98). 

The DEQ has been granted primary enforcement authority in Michigan for the federal 
SDWA under the authority of Act 399. As such, the DEQ, Office of Drinking Water 
and Municipal Assistance, has regulatory oversight for all public water supplies, 
including approximately 1,400 community water supplies and 10,000 noncommunity 
water supplies. A community water supply provides year-round service to 15 or 
more living units (homes, apartments, dorm rooms, etc.) or 25 or more residents. A 
noncommunity water supply has 15 or more service connections or serves 25 or 
more individuals on an average daily basis for not less than 60 days per year. 


2 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


The DEQ engages in a variety of activities to help water systems remain in, or return 
to, compliance. These activities include: conducting surveillance visits (inspections) 
at water systems and reviewing facilities, equipment, and operations; requiring the 
submission of plans and specifications for waterworks system improvements and 
issuing construction permits; providing for the training, examination, certification and 
regulation of persons operating water supplies; helping systems incorporate 
preventive measures; and since 1996, providing financial assistance for system 
improvements. 

5. What is the City’s role in implementing the federal SDWA and Act 399? 

State and federal programs develop regulations and perform oversight and 
compliance activities, but do not treat or deliver water to customers. At the local 
level, public and private water utilities collect, treat, and deliver drinking water to 
consumers in compliance with state and federal regulations. 

The federal SDWA and Act 399 set up multiple barriers against contamination. 
These barriers include: source water protection, multiple treatment components, 
distribution system integrity, proper operations oversight, and public information. As 
the owner of a public water system, the City is responsible for knowing and following 
all requirements under Act 399, such as ensuring proper design, construction, 
operations and maintenance, so that contaminants in tap water do not exceed the 
standards established by law. The City treats the water, and must test its water 
routinely for specified contaminants and report the results to the DEQ. If a water 
system is not meeting these standards, it is the water supplier’s responsibility to 
notify its customers. 

The federal SDWA and Act 399 recognize that customers have the right to know 
what is in their drinking water and where it comes from. The City, like all water 
suppliers, must notify consumers when there is a problem with water quality. 

The City submits samples of its water for laboratory testing (monitoring) to verify the 
water it provides to residents meets all federal and state standards. How often and 
where samples are taken varies from system to system and from contaminant to 
contaminant. The DEQ provides an annual monitoring schedule to the City setting 
forth these requirements. 

In addition, the City is required to employ properly certified water operators that are 
trained and experienced to operate the treatment and distribution systems 
associated with the City’s water system. 

6. What approvals were needed from the DEQ in order for the City to begin using 
its water treatment plant full time? 

The City had long ago been issued construction permits for raw water pumps to 
withdraw water from the Flint River and the City was grandfathered under the water 
withdrawal program (Part 327, Great Lakes Preservation, of the Natural Resources 
and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451 , as amended), as were all existing 
community public water systems at that time. There were no additional DEQ 


3 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


permissions or authorizations required under Act 399 because the City already had 
approval to use the water treatment plant. 

Under Act 399, there are no licenses or permits required to operate public water 
systems. The City did apply for and obtained two construction permits prior to the 
water treatment plant changing from an emergency backup plant to full-time 
operation. These permits were for new chemical feed equipment, changes to the 
electrical service, etc. 

III. THE FLINT RIVER - IS IT A SAFE SOURCE OF DRINKING WATER? 


Seventy-five percent of Michigan’s population served by a public water supply 
receive their drinking water from surface water sources, the majority of which is 
withdrawn from the Great Lakes. However, several public water supplies in Michigan 
utilize water from inland rivers. All surface water sources require significant 
treatment in order to be safe for consumption. 

While all surface water sources must receive a high level of treatment, inland river 
sources present a greater challenge than water withdrawn from one of the Great 
Lakes because of rapidly changing water quality conditions. Under most 
circumstances, rivers are prone to greater fluctuations in temperature, have higher 
amounts of organic material, greater turbidity (suspended solids), and are more 
vulnerable to microbiological and viral contamination than Lakes Huron, Erie, 
Michigan or Superior. While the water chemistry in the Flint River differs from that in 
Lake Huron, it can still be treated in accordance with the federal SDWA and Act 399. 
The waterworks industry has the technology to treat wide ranging source waters to 
provide potable and palatable drinking water, including direct reuse of treated 
wastewater. Regardless of source water quality, all public water systems must 
comply with the same drinking water standards in the finished water. 


It is not the source water that reacts with the homeowners plumbing in the 
distribution system, but rather the finished water quality that is important. Treated 
water leaving the City’s water treatment plant does not contain lead. In addition, the 
treatment process employed by the City includes lime softening to reduce the 
hardness in the river water. The City includes lime softening and pH adjustment 
primarily to improve aesthetic water quality associated with hardness. Lime 
softening is not a process that water supply professionals would expect to increase 
corrosivity of water. The City, however, does practice recarbonation to readjust pH 
at the end of the softening process. 

pH levels of finished water leaving the City’s water treatment plant averaged 7.7. 
Expanded water monitoring conducted quarterly at 25 sample sites located 
throughout the distribution system showed the following: 


July - September 2014 
October - December 201 4 
January - March 2015 
April - June 2015 


average pH = 7.71 
average pH = 7.88 
average pH = 7.81 
average pH = 7.63 


range: 7.56-7.86 
range: 7.62-8.10 
range: 7.60-7.99 
range: 7.48-7.80 


4 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


The data below was obtained at ten of the sampling locations throughout the City’s 
distribution system, while they were still purchasing water from DWSD before the 
City switched to the Flint River as a source: 

January - March 2014 (DWSD) average pH = 7.47 range: 7.40 - 7.54 

April 2014 (DWSD) average pH = 7.49 range: 7.42 - 7.59 

Note that the pH of the treated water produced while the City was using the Flint 
River did not differ significantly from pH values seen in the distribution system during 
the time the City purchased water from DWSD. Thus, pH monitoring provided no 
indication of a change in water corrosivity. 

IV. E. COLI AND TOTAL COLIFORM BACTERIA VIOLATIONS 

1 . What caused the E. coli and total coliform bacteria violations experienced by 
the City in August and September 2014? 

A number of factors, primarily related to distribution system operation and 
maintenance, likely contributed to the Boil Water Advisories in the City during August 
and September 2014 triggered by exceedances of bacteria standards in limited 
areas of the distribution system. In addition, the coliform detections were confined to 
less than 20 percent of the water system. Had the detections been the result of a 
failure in treatment, detections would have been expected throughout the City rather 
than in such a limited geographic area. 

Instead, the violations seem to have been caused by other factors such as aging 
infrastructure. The City’s water distribution system has suffered from a lack of 
infrastructure investment and asset management. Most of the City’s over 550 miles 
of water mains are now over 75 years old, and constructed of unlined cast iron 
piping. This cast iron pipe is subject to tuberculation, which thins and weakens the 
pipe walls in some areas and causes a buildup of sediment and debris on the pipe 
walls in other areas. Tuberculation can lead to water quality issues as well as 
reduced flows and pressures. Tuberculation also encourages the development of 
biofilms. Biofilm growth may occur more frequently in areas where little or no 
disinfectant is maintained. 

The City has also experienced decades of a declining customer base and water use, 
with vacant homes, commercial businesses, and industrial property. Declining water 
use leads to excess residence time (water age) within the City’s distribution pipes 
and water storage facilities, accelerating tuberculation, biofilm growth, and reductions 
of disinfectant concentration in the distribution system. While the City has recently 
seen an infusion of funding for blight removal, contractors using fire hydrants to 
complete this work have been known to cause hydraulic disturbances that dislodge 
and suspend settled debris, which may contribute to the bacterial contamination. 
These hydraulic disturbances were also believed to be a source of the aesthetic 
water quality complaints both the City and the DEQ were receiving. 

The winter of 2013-2014 was also one of the coldest experienced by the water 
system. The City, which historically has unaccounted water losses of over 
30 percent, saw even greater losses since February 2014 due to an increase in cold 
weather-related water main breaks and leaks (City personnel reported 400 water 


5 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


main breaks in calendar year 2014, with greater than 50 percent in the winter 
quarter). The City has also been lacking a formal maintenance program for its more 
than 7,250 valves, which are critical in limiting the areas impacted during water main 
repairs. As an example, two valves on the transmission line used to supply the area 
of the 2014 Boil Water Advisories were found to be closed during the City’s 
investigation of possible sources, causing much longer residence times, reduced 
disinfectant concentrations, and reduced pressures - all potential avenues for 
contamination to enter a distribution system. 

The Boil Water Advisories also occurred during the warmest and relatively wet 
periods of August and September 2014. Warm weather conditions are not only more 
conducive to bacterial growth but also degrade disinfectant concentrations more 
quickly. As already explained, longer residence times, biofilms, and tuberculation 
contribute to lowered disinfectant concentrations. Warm, wet weather conditions 
also allow water contaminated with bacteria to accumulate or pond around piping 
that leaks and breaks. 

During the summer of 2014, the City was actively repairing the distribution system 
(City personnel reported 29 water main breaks in June through August 2014). After 
the switch to the Flint River, it was discovered that there were many broken or closed 
valves in the distribution system (City personnel reported 120 broken valves and 
239 valves in an improper position). As the City began correcting these problems, 
they did detect the presence of coliform organisms in the distribution system in 
testing conducted as a result of the repairs. This sporadic detection is not an 
unusual occurrence. Many communities have experienced similar issues when 
significant repairs are made in the system and/or they suffer water main breaks and 
localized pressure losses. 

2. How were the violations detected? What was the DEQ’s response? 

Federal SDWA regulations regarding monitoring and standards for bacteria in water 
distribution systems are incorporated into Act 399. There are a variety of bacteria, 
parasites, and viruses which can potentially cause health problems if humans ingest 
them in drinking water. Testing water for each of these potential pathogens would be 
difficult and expensive. Instead, community water systems are required to test 
monthly for total coliform and E. coli. Total coliform bacteria, while not pathogenic, 
often originate from the same sources as many pathogens. Therefore, the presence 
of total coliform in drinking water indicates there may be a pathway for pathogens or 
other contaminants to enter the system. The absence of total conforms in the 
distribution system indicates a minimal likelihood that pathogens are present. E. coli 
is itself a pathogen and its detection is considered direct evidence of a health risk. 

The Boil Water Advisories which occurred in the City were associated with bacteria 
monitoring detections and violations of bacteria standards. These advisories were 
issued by the City after consultation with the DEQ. 

Upon receiving information indicating total coliform and E. coli bacteria had been 
detected, the DEQ advised the City to issue a Boil Water Advisory from August 15 
through 20, 2014, for the affected portion of the City. Another Boil Water Advisory 
was issued from September 5 through 9, 2014, due to localized detections of total 


6 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


coliform bacteria in the same and adjacent portions of the City. The advisories 
covered an area of less than 20 percent of the water department’s service area. 

Once a Boil Water Advisory has been issued, time is needed to investigate potential 
causes and implement corrective measures. The larger the water system, the more 
time this may take. Once corrective measures have been taken, samples must be 
collected and analyzed to confirm that bacteria are no longer present. Under 
approved analytical methods used by the City, samples must be incubated for 24 
hours before results can be obtained. In situations where the bacterial contamination 
has been confirmed, two consecutive rounds of safe samples collected at least 24 
hours apart are normally obtained before canceling a Boil Water Advisory. Adding 
each of these steps together, a normal response period to rescind a Boil Water 
Advisory under these circumstances would be expected to take 3 to 4 days. 

V. TOTAL TRIHALOMETHANES (TTHM) VIOLATIONS 

1 . What caused the TTHM violations experienced by the City beginning in late 
summer 2014? 

Disinfectants are an essential element of drinking water treatment because of the 
barrier they provide against waterborne disease-causing microorganisms. However, 
disinfection byproducts form when disinfectants used to treat drinking water react 
with naturally occurring organic materials in the water (e.g., decomposing plant 
material). The formation of disinfection byproducts continues to occur as water 
travels throughout water distribution systems. 

A major challenge for water suppliers is how to provide protection from pathogens 
while simultaneously minimizing health risks to the population from disinfection 
byproducts. Total Trihalomethanes (TTHM - chloroform, bromoform, 
bromodichloromethane, and dibromochloromethane) and halogenated acetic acids 
(HAA5 - monochloro-, dichloro-, trichloro-, monobromo-, dibromo-) are widely 
occurring classes of disinfection byproducts. The amount of TTHM and HAA5 in 
drinking water can change depending on the season, water temperature, amount of 
chlorine added, the amount of plant material in the water, and a variety of other 
factors. All community water systems that chemically disinfect or purchase water 
that has been chemically disinfected are required to monitor for disinfection 
byproducts. 

The Flint River has higher levels of organic material than water in the Great Lakes 
and as a result, the water produced by the City developed higher disinfection 
byproducts than the water purchased from DWSD. Because the water treatment 
plant was previously operating intermittently, it was not possible to predict 
disinfection byproduct levels at distribution system compliance points until the City 
began relying on its water treatment plant continuously. 

As mentioned previously, the City became aware that there were numerous broken 
valves and closed valves that should have been open in the distribution system. At 
that time, the City also began a mapping effort to identify “water age” in the 
distribution system. The longer the residence time or “water age” the greater the 
opportunity for the formation of disinfection byproducts. 


7 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


2. How were the violations detected? What was the DEQ’s response? 

Disinfection byproducts are monitored at eight sites throughout the distribution 
system. A locational running annual average is calculated for each individual site. 
Because TTHM and HAA5 maximum contaminant levels are calculated based on a 
running annual average at specific distribution system locations, the actual violation 
of the standard did not occur until the fall of 2014. However, because it was 
apparent in the summer of 2014 that the standard would eventually be exceeded; the 
DEQ asked the City to proactively implement measures to address the problem 
before the violation required them to do so. 

As a result of maintenance efforts undertaken by the City to repair valves and correct 
improperly closed valves, the City was able to improve water flow in the distribution 
system and thereby reduce residence time or “water age” in the system. Operational 
changes made to reduce the amount of storage in the system also helped reduce 
residence time which contributed to a reduction in disinfection byproduct formation. 

In addition to operational changes to minimize residence time in the distribution 
system, the City added granular activated carbon to its filters in July 2015. Levels of 
TTHMs and HAA5s were reduced and the City returned to compliance on 
September 1, 2015. 

VI. THE TASTE, ODOR, AND COLOR COMPLAINTS RECEIVED BY FLINT 

1 . What caused the taste, odor, and color complaints received by the City from 
residents? 

Taste, odor, and color issues are very personalized. While water leaving the water 
treatment plant did not have any unusual taste, odor or color; during the summer 
after the switch to the Flint River, customer complaints increased. Construction in 
the distribution system, hydrant flushing, and changes in flow characteristics are all 
known causes of disturbances within the distribution system that can cause an 
increase in taste, odor, and color complaints. Aesthetics, such as taste, odor, and 
color, while a concern, by themselves are not a threat to public health. 

2. What was the DEQ’s response? 

The DEQ consulted with the City regarding these complaints. The City indicated that 
they were offering to investigate such complaints for anyone that had issues; but City 
personnel informed the DEQ that they were not able to recreate these situations in 
the field. In addition, as a result of the repair work that was underway and the 
increased flushing to reduce water age in the system to help control TTHMs, it was 
anticipated that there would be short-term disturbances in the system that would 
cause color and odor complaints. All water supplies are advised to provide notice to 
residents prior to undertaking a flushing program because flushing (even routine 
flushing) often causes temporary problems as described. Based on information from 
City personnel, it appeared that the complaints were related to such operational 
activities occurring in the distribution system. 


8 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


VII. LEAD ISSUES IN THE FLINT DRINKING WATER 

1 . What causes lead in drinking water? 

Lead is rarely found in source water. Lead enters tap water through corrosion of 
plumbing materials. Homes built before 1986 are more likely to have lead fixtures 
and solder. Older homes built prior to World War II are more likely to contain lead 
pipes. The most common problem with newer construction is with brass or chrome- 
plated brass faucets and fixtures which can leach significant amounts of lead into the 
water, especially hot water. The amount of lead in tap water also depends on the 
types and amounts of minerals in the water, how long the water stays in the pipes, 
the amount of wear in the pipes, the pH of the water, and its temperature. 

2. What is the Lead and Copper Rule? 

On June 7, 1991, the USEPA published a regulation to control lead and copper in 
drinking water. This regulation is known as the Lead and Copper Rule (also referred 
to as the LCR). The treatment technique for the rule requires systems to monitor 
drinking water at customer taps. If the 90th percentile for lead exceeds an action 
level of 15 parts per billion (ppb) or the 90th percentile for copper exceeds an action 
level of 1 .3 parts per million (ppm), the system must undertake a number of 
additional actions to control corrosion. If the action level for lead is exceeded, the 
water supply must also inform the public about steps they should take to protect their 
health and the water supply may have to replace lead service lines under their 
control. 

3. What is the lead action level? 

For most contaminants, the USEPA sets an enforceable regulation called a 
maximum contaminant level based on the maximum contaminant level goal. 
Maximum contaminant levels are set as close to the maximum contaminant level 
goals as possible, considering cost, benefits, and the ability of public water systems 
to detect and remove contaminants at the water treatment plant using suitable 
treatment technologies. Because lead contamination of drinking water often results 
from corrosion of the plumbing materials belonging to water system customers, the 
USEPA established a treatment technique rather than a maximum contaminant level 
for lead. A treatment technique is an enforceable procedure or level of technological 
performance which water systems must follow to control a contaminant. Although 
the maximum contaminant level goal for lead is zero, based upon the above factors, 
the USEPA has established the action level for lead at 15 ppb. 

The treatment technique regulation for lead requires water systems that produce 
drinking water to control the corrosivity of the water. The regulation also requires 
systems to collect customer tap samples from sites served by the system that are 
more likely to have plumbing materials containing lead. If the 90th percentile action 
level for lead is exceeded, then water systems are required to take additional actions 
including: 

• Optimizing corrosion control treatment (for water systems serving greater than 
50,000 people that have not fully optimized corrosion control). 


9 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


• Educating the public about lead in drinking water and actions consumers can 
take to reduce their exposure to lead. 

• Replacing the portions of lead service lines (lines that connect distribution 
mains to customers) under the water system’s control. 

4. Did DWSD have optimized corrosion control treatment? 

After the LCR passed in 1991 , DWSD and all of its consecutive customer systems 
conducted two rounds of monitoring for lead and copper. Copper levels were well 
below action level limits, but lead levels exceeded the action level of 15 ppb for 
DWSD and many of its customer communities. As a result, DWSD installed 
corrosion control treatment. DWSD performed a corrosion control study and 
concluded that they could reduce the corrosivity of the water by the addition of an 
orthophosphate, a corrosion inhibitor. 

5. Did the DEQ require the City to have corrosion control in place when it 
switched to the Flint River as its source of drinking water? 

No. There are two ways under the LCR to deem a water supply as providing 
“optimal corrosion control” - either by sampling and determining through a 
calculation that the supply is “optimal” or by installing treatment if it is needed. The 
DEQ requested that the City perform two 6-month rounds of monitoring to 
demonstrate if the City was practicing optimal corrosion control treatment. According 
to state regulations [R325. 1 0604f(2)(b)(iii)], a system can demonstrate optimized 
corrosion controls by sampling in two, consecutive 6-month monitoring periods and 
comparing the results of this monitoring to the lead level in the source. Optimal 
corrosion control under this scenario would be defined as having the 90th percentile 
in each of these monitoring periods lower than the sum of the lead in the source and 
the practical quantification limit for lead of 5 ppb. Since the source water has 0 ppb 
lead, the City would have been deemed optimal if its 90th percentile of lead was 
5 ppb or less in these two consecutive periods. However, once a system has 
installed treatment, it would also be considered optimized regardless of the 90th 
percentile level achieved, as long as it does not exceed the action level of 15 ppb. 

In this case, the City had been purchasing water from DWSD that was treated for 
corrosion control. It was the DWSD water system that was considered as having 
optimized corrosion control at that point. Since the City water system had not been 
the supplier of water before, the DEQ did not require the City to maintain corrosion 
control for which it was not responsible [R325.1 0604f(2)(b)]. It could not “maintain” 
operations undertaken elsewhere by a different entity for a different source of water. 
The DEQ’s instructions to the City were consistent with past practices afforded to all 
other large water systems. At the beginning of the LCR, all large systems were 
initially granted the option to demonstrate optimal corrosion control treatment through 
full-scale monitoring under the applicable rules. For these reasons, two 6-month 
rounds of monitoring, as required by the LCR, were the required means to determine 
whether or not optimal corrosion control was being achieved. 

6. How does the DEQ calculate the 90th percentile? 

To determine the 90th percentile of a list of lead or copper results, the procedure 
below is followed: 


10 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


Step 1 : Place lead or copper results in ascending order 
Step 2: Assign each sample a number, 1 for lowest value 
Step 3: Multiply the total number of samples by 0.9 - this yields the 90th percentile 
sample. For example: 20 samples x 0.9 = 18th sample. This is the 90th 
percentile level. 

Calculating the 90th percentile is easiest when a supply collects 1 0 samples (or a 
multiple of 1 0). Note that the 90th percentile must be interpolated if the number of 
samples is not a multiple of 10. 

7. What was the result of the first round of monitoring conducted by the City? 

The first 6-month round of lead and copper monitoring conducted by the City ended 
on December 31 , 2014. One hundred samples were submitted and the 90th 
percentile lead level was calculated to be 6 ppb. The next step required by the DEQ 
was for the City to collect a second round of monitoring. 

8. What was the result of the second round of monitoring conducted by the City? 

The second 6-month round of lead and copper monitoring conducted by the City 
ended on June 30, 2015. Sixty-nine samples that complied with the site selection 
criteria were submitted and the 90th percentile lead level was calculated to be 
1 1 ppb. The conclusion from these results was that the City, while in compliance 
with the action level, exceeded the level required to be deemed as having optimized 
corrosion control. 

9. Why was the City required to collect 1 00 compliance samples for lead and 
copper in the first 6-month monitoring period of July through December of 
2014 and then only 60 compliance samples in the second 6-month period of 
January through June of 2015? 

The number of compliance samples required for lead and copper is based upon the 
population served by the water system as identified in the table below, taken from 
Rule 325.10710a of Act 399. 


Supply Size 

(Number of People Served} 

Number of Sites 
(Standard Monitoring} 


Mare than 150 000 

100 

so 

10.001 to 150.000 

60 

30 

3.301 to 10.500 

4i 

20 

SOI to 3.300 

m 

10 

til: to 500 

ti 

S 

Fewer than 101 

5 

5 


The number of samples the City was required to collect in the first round of 
monitoring after they began relying on the Flint River was based on the 2010 census, 
which listed the City’s population as more than 100,000 residents. In March of 2015, 
the City provided updated information that indicated the City’s population had 
decreased to less than 100,000. Therefore, they were only required to collect 60 
samples. There is no rule prohibiting the collection of additional compliance samples 
- only establishing a minimum number necessary. 


11 


















Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


10. What actions did the DEQ order the City to undertake after the second round of 
monitoring? 

While the City’s LCR compliance monitoring continued to meet action level 
requirements, the City exceeded the level required to be deemed as having 
optimized corrosion control. Following receipt of the City’s compliance monitoring 
results, the DEQ sent a letter on August 17, 2015, requiring the City to install 
corrosion control treatment. 

Under the LCR, the City has 6 months to let the DEQ know whether it intends to 
conduct a study, then 18 months to perform the study and make its recommendation, 
and 24 months to complete installation of the selected corrosion control. The DEQ 
requested the City accelerate this schedule. The City submitted plans and 
specifications to install corrosion control treatment and a construction permit was 
issued by the DEQ on October 28, 2015. The City is in the process of installing the 
necessary equipment and procuring the appropriate chemicals. Treatment is 
expected to be on-line by the end of November 201 5. As of October 1 6, 2015, the 
City resumed purchasing water from DWSD that is already optimized and provides a 
corrosion inhibitor. The additional treatment by the City will further enhance the 
amount of inhibitor in the system. 

11. What had Michigan Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) advised 
the DEQ regarding blood lead levels prior to the DEQ ordering the City to 
implement optimized corrosion control? 

In an e-mail dated July 28, 2015, regarding blood lead testing, the 
Michigan DHHS indicated that they: 

“...compared lead testing rates and lead testing results to the 
same time frame for the previous 3 years, to see if there were 
any patterns that suggested that there were increased rates of 
lead poisoning after the water supply was switched. Per the 
attached charts - 

• Lead testing rates remained about the same from 
year-to-year... 


City of Flint, Children less than 16 years of age 
with First-Time Elevated Blood Lead Levels 

30 

20 

10 

o 

May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr 
"""""►2011-2012 »««««« 2012-202.3 ««^2Q13-2G14 «««««*2014-20iS 



12 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


• There was a spike in elevated blood lead tests from July- 
September 2014... 


City of Flint, Children less than 16 years of age 
Tested for Lead Poisoning 


500 



100 

0 

May June July Aug Sep;. Oel Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr 

^^ 2011-2012 2012-2013 2013-2014 2014-2015 


• However, that pattern was not terribly different from what we 
saw in the previous three years; especially in 2011-2012 (we are 
working with our Epidemiologist to statistically verify any 
significant differences). 

• We commonly see a ‘seasonal effect’ with lead, related to 
people opening and closing windows more often in the summer, 
which disturbs old deteriorating paint on the windows, sills and 
sashes. Window fans frequently blow and spread the lead dust 
from the deteriorating paint to other parts of the room/house. We 
suspected that the summer data spike may be related to this 
effect. 

• If the home water supply lines and/or river water were 
contributing to elevated blood lead tests, we expected that the 
increased rates would extend beyond the summer, but they drop 
quite a bit from September to October, stayed low over the 
winter, and are just starting to tail up again in the spring of 2015.” 

This e-mail from DHHS in concert with the completion of two 6-month rounds of lead 
compliance sampling data indicating that the City had not exceeded an action level 
for lead provided the basis for the DEQ to maintain that the water in the City 
continued to be in compliance with the federal SDWA and Act 399. 

12. When did the DEQ first become aware of allegations of elevated blood levels 
being detected in certain children? 

The DEQ was notified on August 23, 2015, by a professor from Virginia Tech that 
“over the next few months we will be studying Flint water quality issues. . Results 
indicating elevated lead levels in homes were reported as part of this study in late 
August. In September 2015, information was reported in news articles that 


13 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


pediatricians in the City had data suggesting an increase in children’s blood lead 
levels in two zip codes in the Flint area. 

Prior to these dates, the City had already completed the required two 6-month 
rounds of monitoring and the DEQ had made a determination that the City must 
install corrosion control treatment as documented in correspondence dated 
August 17, 2015. 

VIII. QUESTIONS RAISED REGARDING THE DEQ’S ACTIONS 

1 . What was the DEQ’s response to the USEPA’s inquiry in February 2015 
regarding the optimized corrosion control treatment being implemented by the 
City under the LCR? 

The DEQ indicated that the City was complying with the LCR, the lead 90th 
percentile level was below the action level of 15 ppb, and the City was already 
conducting the second round of monitoring which would provide for a determination 
of whether additional treatment needed to be installed. It should be noted that once 
treatment is designated as optimal, there is no requirement in the LCR that lead 
results be lower than they were before treatment was installed. The 90th percentile 
only needs to be lower than the action level in the LCR. 

2. Did the DEQ attempt to mislead the USEPA in a February 27, 2015, e-mail 
responding to the USEPA’s inquiry regarding Optimal Corrosion Control 
Treatment? 

No. There was no attempt by the DEQ to mislead the USEPA. There is an e-mail 
from Steve Busch, Jackson and Lansing District Supervisor, Office of Drinking 
Water and Municipal Assistance, indicating that the City was practicing a corrosion 
control program. What was meant was that the City was performing the required 
monitoring to determine whether or not they were practicing optimized corrosion 
control. The DEQ subsequently clarified its position in follow-up e-mails and 
telephone conversations with the USEPA. 

3. When General Motors announced its intent to terminate water service from the 
City and purchase water from Genesee County, should this have been a sign 
that there were concerns with the quality of the water after the switch to the 
Flint River? 

No. General Motors made a decision regarding the quality of water for its 
manufacturing processes. At the time, the company indicated that the chloride levels 
were above limits acceptable as part of the manufacturing facility’s limit for 
production purposes. The level of chlorides in the water treated by the City was not 
a human health or aesthetic concern. 

Chloride does have a secondary maximum contaminant level established by the 
USEPA, not for health-related concerns but rather for taste and aesthetic concerns. 
Concentrations greater than the secondary maximum contaminant level of 
250 milligrams per liter (mg/I) become objectionable due to taste. According to the 
City’s records, the chloride concentration in the Flint River water is generally about 
45 mg/I and the treated water chloride concentration leaving the water treatment 


14 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


plant ranges between 55 and 65 mg/I. It should be noted that the City uses ferric 
chloride as its primary coagulant, although this does not add a significant amount of 
chloride to the finished water. 

4. Has the USEPA subsequently admitted that the LCR is subject to differing 
interpretations such as that presented by the DEQ? 

Yes. On November 3, 2015, the USEPA issued a memorandum regarding the “Lead 
and Copper Rule Requirements for Optimal Corrosion Control Treatment for Large 
Drinking Water Systems”. This memorandum addresses concerns raised about the 
application of the LCR, specifically the requirements pertaining to maintenance of 
optimal corrosion control treatment, in situations in which a large water system 
ceases to purchase treated water and switches to a new drinking water source. The 
USEPA states that this type of situation rarely arises, that the language of the LCR 
does not specifically discuss such circumstances, and that there are differing 
possible interpretations of the LCR with respect to how the rule’s optimal corrosion 
control treatment procedures apply to this situation. The memorandum is intended to 
clarify, on a prospective basis, steps agencies should take or apply in the future. 
USEPA’s new guidance provides acknowledgement that the LCR is subject to 
differing interpretations. The DEQ’s interpretation and application of the LCR in this 
situation was in compliance with the federal SDWA and Act 399. 

5. Did the DEQ reject any of the samples submitted by the City? 

Yes, samples at two locations were excluded from the compliance calculation in 
conformance with rules issued by the USEPA. 

According to the LCR, compliance samples must be a first draw, 1 -liter sample 
collected from a cold water, kitchen or bathroom tap after the tap has stood unused 
for not less than 6 hours. Federal and state rules require community public water 
systems to identify a pool of targeted high-risk sampling sites, called Tier 1 sampling 
sites. For a municipality such as the City, the Tier 1 sampling pool must consist of 
single family structures that are: 

• served by a lead service line, 

• contain lead pipes, or 

• contain copper pipes soldered with lead installed after 1 982 but before Michigan 
enacted the ban on solder containing high concentrations of lead (June, 1988). 

As long as a community has Tier 1 sites that contain lead service lines, they are 
required to collect at least 50 percent of their compliance samples from these lead 
service line sites. Finally, federal and state rules specify that “Sampling sites may 
not include faucets that have point of use or point of entry treatment devices 
designed to remove inorganic contaminants.” Such treatment devices include home 
softeners, iron filters, etc. Samples collected from multiple family residences, 
commercial buildings, institutional facilities, or single family structures with 
point-of-use or point-of-entry treatment can only be used if the community has 
insufficient Tier 1 sites available. 


15 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


One of the samples submitted by the City was excluded from the 90th percentile 
compliance calculation in the latest monitoring period because it was taken from a 
tap at a non-residential site (non-Tier 1). The other sample result that was excluded 
was collected from a single family home that has a whole house treatment system. 
Both of these sites are, therefore, excluded from the compliance consideration based 
upon federal and state rules. 

6. Did the DEQ review the information submitted by the City to ensure all 
samples were from Tier 1 sites? 

Yes. The DEQ examined the information submitted and certified by the City that its 
LCR compliance monitoring sites consisted entirely of Tier 1 criteria sites, which met 
the requirements of this rule to maximize sampling of high-risk targeted sites. 

During the initial implementation of the LCR approximately 25 years ago, water 
supplies were required to complete a materials evaluation of their distribution system 
to identify a pool of targeted, high-risk sampling sites. These sites were to be 
categorized into one of three Tiers (1, 2, or 3) based on risk. The DEQ created an 
LCR reporting template for water systems to identify each compliance sampling site 
by Tier, service line material, and building plumbing material. 

If a water system has sufficient Tier 1 sites, they are required to sample them before 
using any lower Tier sites. Furthermore, if they have sufficient sampling sites with 
lead service lines, they are required to use them to make up at least 50 percent of 
their sampling pool each monitoring period. Water supplies are also required to use 
the same sampling sites each time or explain on their LCR reporting form why they 
were unable to do so. Finally, the water system is required to certify all of the 
information they provide on the LCR reporting form is factual. 

The DEQ must rely upon the public water system to identify appropriate sampling 
sites for LCR monitoring. The DEQ public water supply program has no control or 
authority over service lines or domestic plumbing. As a result, we have no records 
on construction standards or materials used by customers for these components. If 
these records exist, they are kept by plumbing code enforcement officials. 

In 2015, City employees again certified that the information submitted on their LCR 
monitoring reports for the two 6-month rounds of monitoring conducted after they 
began treating the Flint River were accurate, and DEQ staff review of that 
information indicated it was in compliance with the monitoring requirements. The 
DEQ had no reason to question the validity of the City’s reports until the DEQ heard 
City employees revealing to the media that the City did not know for certain if its 
compliance monitoring was collected from homes with lead service lines. As a 
result, the DEQ began to investigate the City’s monitoring sites. As the City began to 
transfer its customer information to electronic records, the DEQ determined from the 
information available that a significant number of these sites that had been listed as 
having lead service lines either did not have them or the information was unavailable. 
On November 9, 2015, the DEQ notified the City in writing that it would be necessary 
to conduct a complete assessment of its sampling pool and report back its findings 
by December 30, 2015. The DEQ is now awaiting the City’s response. 


16 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


7. Did the DEQ believe the levels of lead found at 212 Browning in April 2015 
were indicative of a system-wide problem? 

High levels of lead were collected in samples taken from this residence. It was 
determined to be coming from an unusually long lead service line. For some reason, 
this home was not connected to the water main that ran in front of the house, but 
rather to a main located on a street several houses away. The City replaced the lead 
service line May 6, 201 5. Since the internal plumbing of the house is plastic, it was 
believed that replacement of the lead service line would resolve the problem, and 
subsequent sampling taken at this address showed that replacement of the service 
line did mitigate the problem. There was, therefore, no reason to believe that this 
was indicative of a system-wide problem. 

8. Do the DEQ’s sampling instructions comply with the LCR? 

The DEQ continues to seek official clarification from the USEPA regarding the 
sampling protocols. The DEQ’s sampling recommendations were developed to 
ensure compliance with the USEPA’s guidance provided in the preamble to their lead 
and copper regulations that said that household use should be “typical” for a 
residential customer on the day before sample collection for lead and copper. Early 
in the implementation of the LCR, the DEQ had encountered too many situations 
where compliance samples had been collected from kitchen and bathroom taps that 
had not been used in days and in some cases, even weeks, resulting in excessively 
stagnated water and correspondingly high lead levels that did not represent typical 
exposure expected after overnight stagnation. To incorporate these results into 
further regulatory decision making could have led to actions that were not indicative 
of a true public health threat. Further complicating this issue was the USEPA’s direct 
implementation of the LCR in Washington, D.C., where it was learned that some 
“valid” lead results were not always being included in compliance calculations. 
Subsequently, the USEPA made invalidation of samples for any reason much more 
difficult. In order to ensure samples were taken at customer taps representative of 
typical use, the DEQ devised the current recommendations for ensuring appropriate 
but not excessive stagnation for LCR monitoring. 

The DEQ continues to believe it is appropriate to ensure that taps being sampled are 
representative of typical household use and are sampled during the recommended 
stagnation period of 6-18 hours. The LCR does not say the result should represent 
the “absolute worst case” condition - it talks about sampling the highest risk 
locations (lead plumbing, lead service lines, high lead content solder piping, etc.) 
after overnight stagnation and then collecting a first draw sample so as not to flush 
elevated lead from that tap at that point in time. There are a number of other states 
that share the DEQ’s interpretation of the rule and the DEQ encourages the USEPA 
to provide official clarification directed at all states with primacy. 


17 



Privileged Attorney-Client Communication 


November 16, 2015 


9. Does the DEQ require the use of small-neck bottles to obtain samples? 

No. The DEQ does not mandate the use of small-neck bottles; it is the sampling 
method that is specified in both the federal SDWA and Act 399. Each certified 
drinking water laboratory provides bottles to their customers upon request for any 
particular analysis in accordance with the specifications in the SDWA. The bottles 
provided by the DEQ Drinking Water Laboratory for a lead and copper corrosion 
control sample meet these requirements. 


18 



From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, November 17, 2015 5:24 PM 

To: Anderson, Madhu (DEQ); Ken Sikkema (ksikkema@pscinc.com) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Weber, Travis (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); 

Murray, David (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Lyon, Nick (DHHS) 

Subject: RE: Privileged Attorney-Client Communication - Outline of Flint Drinking Water Issues 

Thank you Madhu, the outline is helpful to all of us. 


From: Anderson, Madhu (DEQ) 

Sent: Tuesday, November 17, 2015 11:20 AM 

To: Ken Sikkema ( ksikkema@psc.inc.cont) < ksikkema@psdnc.com > 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <.Agenj@michi ga n. g ov>; Baird, Richard (GOV) <hairdr@michigan.gox'>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 
<muchmored@michi ga n .go v>: Weber, Travis (GOV) <’WeberT7 @ ntichi g an .go v>; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 
<hoilinsh@michigan.gov>; Murray, David (GOV) <Murra y Dl @ mich iga n .go v>; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 
<Wurfels@michig a n .go v>; Lyon, Nick (DHHS) <L v onN2 @ michigan. g ov> 

Subject: Privileged Attorney-Client Communication - Outline of Flint Drinking Water Issues 

Ken - Attached is the outline of the Flint Drinking Water issue (in a question and answer format) we have prepared for you to share 
with your colleagues on the Governor’s Flint Water Task Force, Please let me know if we can provide any other material in preparation 
for the meeting tomorrow. 



Madhu R. Anderson 

Deputy Director, Economic and Strategic initiatives 
Ej andersonm30@ m ich ig an.g o v 



i 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 


Posthumus, Dick (GOV) 

Thursday, December 03, 2015 4:17 PM 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Rich Baird; Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); 
Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Subject: Flint 


I know just enough about the Flint situation to be dangerous so if the following doesn't make sense let me know. I have 
talked to both Senator Ananich and Representative Neely. They like the Governor and appreciate his efforts in 
Flint. However, they believe because of the combination of the water issue, the "take over" issue, and the approach 
that Darnell and/or the city manager is taking that it has created a great deal of animosity in Flint. I asked Rep. Neely if 
the Governor could only do one thing what would you have him do to improve the situation. He said to give the new 
mayor the ability to appoint some of her own executive staff (legal counsel, etc) that aren't involved with the finances 
(much like we did in Detroit). Is this something we should consider? 

Dick 


l 



From: 

Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, December 08, 2015 2:56 PM 

To: 

Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: 

Biehl, Laura (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Subject: 

12/9 Radio Briefings 


RDS - LIVE Radio interview with WTCM and Ron Jolly 
Time: 7:25 - 7:35 a.m. 


RDS to call: 

Call at 7:24, will go live within one minute 

Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 

Possible Topics: 

• Road Funding package 

• Energy update 

• Syrian Refugee stance 

• Pipeline Safety Committee 


Recent articles: 

Northern republicans backed road plan (Cheboygan Tribune) 

http://Vww.dieboyg3nnews.com/attide/20151110/8LOGS/i511Q9101 

County Commissioners wait on pipeline resolution (Petoskey News) 

http://www.petoskeynews.com/featured--pnr/county-commissioners-wait-on-pipeline-resolution/articje 2b43079Gc4ff 
57c2-bbSa-ccl45c59d29c.html 


Senate leaders: Michigan energy overhaul won't happen in 2015 (MLive) 

http://www.miive.com/lansing--news/lndex.ssf/2015/12/senate leaders michigan energy. hf ml 

Utilities stress urgency of Michigan energy overhaul as it spills into 2016 (MLive) 

http://www.miiva.com/lansing--news/index.ssf/2015/12/utinties stress urgency of mi.htrnl 

Despite Snyder's "pause," Syrian refugees continue to arrive in Michigan (Michigan Radio) 

http://mlchiganradio.0rg/post/despite-snvder-s-p3use-syrian-refu8ees--continue-arrive-rriichte3n#stream/ 


Last interview: 4/30/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 
Market: Traverse City / online http://wtcmr3dio.com/ 

Contact: Studio line: Back-up: 


RDS - LIVE Radio interview with WSJM and Pat Moody 
Time: 7:40 - 7:50 a.m. 


l 





Last interview: 3/20/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 
Market: St. Joe/Benton Harbor- htt p://vww.wsjrn.eom/ 

Contact: Studio line:^^^^^^^|; Back-up (Pat's cell):BIHflHMi 


RDS - TAPED Radio interview with WFIMT and Jason Cooper 
Time: 7:55 - 8:05 a.m. 

RDS to call: 

Call right at 7:55, interview is taped. 

Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 

Possible Topics: 

• Road Funding package 

• Flint's emergency manager exit 

• Flint water 


2 


• Syrian refugee talks 

• Concealed carry bill re: prison guards and parole officers 

• Education accomplishments and look-ahead (if time allows) 

Recent articles: 

Flint schools slash debt by $11M, but state to review finances under new law (MLive) 

http://www.miiv e .com/news/fHnt/index.ssf/2015/i2/f1ir;t school district slashes. html 

Flint city attorney resigns; new mayor says she expects to name replacement (MLive) 

http://www.miive.conn/news/fHnt,/index.ssf/2015/i2/peter bade flint city atforney.html 

Flint Mayor Karen Waver unveils 100-day plan, including audit of city funds (MLive) 

http://www.mlive.cotr!/news/fiint,/index.ssf/2015/12/fiir;t mayor karen weav ers 100-. html 

Push to recall Snyder over Flint water crisis stalls (Detroit Free Press) 

http://www.freep.com/story/news/iocai/ry;ichigan/2015/12/03/eiections-board-rejects-l5test-snyder-rec3H- 

petition/76712410/ 

Give Flint $50M to replace lead water pipes (Detroit Free Press) 

http;//www.freep.com/story/news/coiumnists/rocheMe -niey /201S/ll/12/fiint-w5ter-sheidon-neeiey-michigan- 

l egl f ; iafure/75510846/ 

Last interview: 3/10/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 

Notes: Jason Cooper< http://v^nt.corri/suthor/1cooDer/ > WFNT's News Director and host of Conversations with Jason 
Cooper. Interview will air during Jason's show from 11-noon. 

Market: Flint and Saginaw Metro and online at hUpcW^M.ootn/ 

Contact: Studio line: Back-up : 



Communications Representative 

Executive Office of Michigan Governor Rick Snyder 

0: 517-335-6397 

M: MBBBl 



3 




From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 


Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:49 PM 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 
Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

RE: 12/9 Radio Briefings 


Brad and Jen are working Off it. Spoke to them both right after out comrns. meeting, i just foHowed up asking for an ETA. 
Morgan is holding the briefing for now. 

From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:48 PM 

To: Brown, Jessica (GOV) <BrownJ53@michigan.gov>; Bedan, Morgan (GOV) <BedanM@michigan.gov> 

Cc: Biehl, Laura (GOV) <BiehlL@michigan.gov> 

Subject: RE: 12/9 Radio Briefings 

Did we get updated Flint info for him? 


From: Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 2:56 PM 
To: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) <B.edanM^ 

Cc: Biehl, Laura (GOV) Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Subject: 12/9 Radio Briefings 

RDS - LIVE Radio interview with WTCM and Ron Jolly 
Time: 7:25 - 7:35 a.m. 

RDS to call: 

Call at 7:24, will go live within one minute 

Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 

Possible Topics: 

• Road Funding package 

• Energy update 

• Syrian Refugee stance 

• Pipeline Safety Committee 


Recent articles: 

Northern republicans backed road plan (Cheboygan Tribune) 

http://vvww,cheboygannews.cofri/8rtide/20151110/BLOGS/1511Q9101 

County Commissioners wait on pipeline resolution (Petoskey News) 

http://www.petoskevnews.eom/featured-prfr/coufftv-commiss:oners-wa:t-on-pioeiine-resoiution/article 2b43079f-c4ff 


57c2-bb9a-ccl4Sc59d29c.html 

Senate leaders: Michigan energy overhaul won't happen in 2015 (MLive) 

http://www.rriiive.com/lansing--news/index.ssf/2015/12/senate leaders michiean enerey.htmi 




57c2-bb9a-ecl4Sc59d2gc.html 

Senate leaders: Michigan energy overhaul won't happen in 2015 (MLive) 

http://www.n-iii ve .com/l 3nsing-n ews/jnd e x.ssf/2015/12/senat e leaders michigan ener gy . htm 


Last interview: 3/20/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 
Market: St. Joe/Benton Harbor- nttp.;//y WfW.W3jm:Cpm/ 


2 



Contact: Studio line: 


Back-up (Pat's cell): 


RDS - TAPED Radio interview with WFNT and Jason Cooper 
Time: 7:55 - 8:05 a.m. 
to call: 

Call right at 7:55, interview is taped. 

Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 

Possible Topics: 

• Road Funding package 

• Flint's emergency manager exit 

• Flint water 

• Syrian refugee talks 

• Concealed carry bill re: prison guards and parole officers 

• Education accomplishments and look-ahead (if time allows) 

Recent articles: 

Flint schools slash debt by $11M, but state to review finances under new law (MLive) 

Flint city attorney resigns; new mayor says she expects to name replacement (MLive) 

.b.t.t£l&wW.W.i£n.!LYe^ 

Flint Mayor Karen Waver unveils 100-day plan, including audit of city funds (MLive) 

Mt&liZw.W.W.i.0.!.LYe : cpm/new^ 

Push to recall Snyder over Flint water crisis stalls (Detroit Free Press) 

Give Flint $50M to replace lead water pipes (Detroit Free Press) 

Last interview: 3/10/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 

Notes: Jason Cooper< http://v^ni.con'i/auihor/:coop6r/ > WFNT's News Director and host of Conversations with Jason 
Cooper. Interview will air during Jason's show from 11-noon. 

Market: Flint and Saginaw Metro and online at hUp://wfnLcotn/ 

Contact: Studio line: Back-up: BMIlBiiiBIlilfi 


3 



Communications Representative 
Executive Office of Michigan Governor Rick Snyder 
0 : 517 - 335-6397 
M: 

Btownj53g2> rriichlgari.gov 



From: Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:54 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

Subject: RE: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 

ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 


Jen/DHHS - are working on the updated numbers regarding how many have been tested since the Oct. 1 action plan was 
implemented and current instructions for local residents regarding testing needs and filters. Sounds like the updated 
numbers is the hold-up. She'll send ASAP. 


Brad/DEQ - is sending some talking points to accompany the report. Should have this soon 


From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:50 PM 

To: Biehl, Laura (GOV) < BiehlL(Smichigan.gov >: Brown, Jessica (GOV) < 8rownJ53jSimichigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 


This was last night's update 


From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, December 07, 2015 3:34 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV) <scottal2 @ michi g an. g ov>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <mudimored@michigan.gov>; Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigan,gov >; Emmitt, Beth (GOV) < emmittb@michigan.gov >; Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 
< BedanM@michiKan.gov >; Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@micbigan.gov > 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) < WyantD@michigan.gov >; Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < Pickinson$@micbigan,gov >; Edgerton, Shelly 
(LARA) < £dgertonSl@michigan.gov >; Dykema, Linda D. (DHHS) < DvkemaL@michigari.gov > 

Subject: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 

Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

• Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

• Document on What is a Part Per Billion. 

As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. I have also added Richard Baird to this weekly email. 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



2 



From: Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 5:04 PM 

To: Bedan, Morgan (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Cc: Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

Subject: RE: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 

ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: Flint Update for WFNT.docx 


Morgan/Jarrod: 


Attached is the update for Flint water and the WENT interview. Includes testing numbers, steps families a can take to 
reduce lead exposure (i.e. free testing hotline, where to get filters, etc.}. Also touches on the top three Items and where 
they stand from the Governor's 10-point action plan. 


From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:50 PM 

To: Biehl, Laura (GOV) < BiehlL@michigan.gov >; Brown, Jessica (GOV) < Brownj53@michigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 

This was last night's update 


From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, December 07, 2015 3:34 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV) < scott3l2@michigan.gov >; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michigan.gov >; Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@miehigan.gov >; Emmitt, Beth (GOV) < emmittb@michjgan.gov >; Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 
< BedanM@michigan.gov >; Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) < WyantD@michigan.gov >; Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DickinsonS@michigan.gQv >; Edgerton, Shelly 
(LARA) < EdgertonSl@m8chigan.gov >; Dykema, Linda D. (DHHS) < DykemaL@michigan.gov > 

Subject: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 

Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

• Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

• Document on What is a Part Per Billion. 

As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. I have also added Richard Baird to this weekly email. 


Thank you. 
Dan Wyant 



Director 



Flint Fast Facts for WFNT interview 

From: Comms -Jess Brown 
DEQ-Brad Wurfel 
DHHS - Jennifer Smith 
Date: December 8, 2015 


1. How many people have been tested since Oct. 1 Flint Water Action Plan was implemented? 

• Total of 1,836 tested, 39 elevated results 

o Children 0 - 5: 806 tested 
o Children 6 - 17: 525 tested 
o Adults: 505 tested 

2. What are the most recent recommendations to protect your family from lead exposure? 

• Protecting your family from lead in the water: 

o Get your water tested for lead. It's free. Call learn more. 

o Use a water filter in your home. MDHHS continues to provide free water filters 
and replacement cartridges to Flint residents at four locations, including the 
MDHHS Flint offices and the Genesee County Community Action Resource 
Department. 

o Run only cold water through the filter. 

o If you do not have a water filter, use bottled water for drinking and mixing 
formula. 

o Use filtered or bottled water for drinking (including making coffee, drink mixes, 
juice, baby formula), and cooking (even if you boil the water, the lead will stay in 
the water and food). 

o If you have to use unfiltered water for drinking or cooking, run the tap for five 
minutes before using the water 

• Testing children: 

o Children who live in the city of Flint should be tested for lead exposure. This 
should be done as soon as possible. 

o The best place to get your child's blood lead test is your doctor's office. Contact 
your primary care provider. 

o Children can also get a free lead test at the Genesee County Health Department. 
For help with transportation, call 2-1-1. 

• Safe cleaning: 

o Safe cleaning is important. Keeping your home clean and safe from lead hazards 
will help to protect your family. 

o Buildings built before 1978 could have lead paint in them. Use wet paper towels 
to clean up paint chips and dust in these older buildings. Be sure to clean 
around windows, play areas, and floors. 

o Wash hands and toys often with soap and water. 

o You can use unfiltered tap water to wipe down countertops, mop floors, and 
wash clothes 


The DEQ continues implementing the Governor's 10-point action plan to protect kids and families in 
Flint: 


1. SCHOOLS TESTING 



• The Governor's plan commits that DEQ will test water in every Flint school. To date, 8 
schools in Flint have undergone a thorough inspection of their plumbing. Crews from the 
state are completing one to two schools each weekend. 

• The story has been the same in each school inspected: lead exposure has been limited to old 
drinking fountains and faucets that should have been changed out years ago. When these 
fixtures are run for a couple minutes, lead presence drops to safe levels. If / when these 
fixtures are removed, it will address the lead exposure in schools. 

• DEQ has not identified lead in the deeper plumbing of the schools. That's great news. It 
means fixing the issue will be comparatively inexpensive and quick. 

2. COMMUNITY WATER TESTING 

• Since September, more than 500 residents have taken advantage of free home water 
sampling through the DEQ lab. Results are updated regularly on the DEQ web site, 

www.michigan.gov/FLINTWATER . 

• Residents are encouraged to continue taking advantage of this free service, but also are 
encouraged to get kids tested for blood lead levels. 

3. LEAD SERVICE LINE REPLACEMENT 

• The only way to remove the threat of lead exposure in drinking water is to remove sources like 
old faucets and lead service lines. The DEQ is working with the city to develop a long-term plan 
for removing the service lines. This is complicated because the service line is the portion that 
runs from the city system to the residence. It's the part that is mostly on private property and is 
generally considered the customer's responsibility. 

• DEQ worked with Congressman Kildee to get EPA approval to use Revolving Loan Fund dollars to 
accomplish lead service line replacement. 


OTHER VARIOUS ISSUES: 

• Cong. Kildee has renewed calls for loan forgiveness in Flint. The city owes the state 
approximately $20.8 million for past loans, and they're scheduled to be paid off in 2024. DEQ 
cannot forgive old loans; we can, however, build loan forgiveness into new loans. Forgiveness is 
presently capped at 30 percent on new loans. 

• City has called on DEQ to pay for fixes to the broader water distribution system on the idea that 
running river water through the system for 14 months ruined it. That's an unproven statement. 
The system has been in a serious state of disrepair for many years. We have not addressed this 
issue in the media. We are focused on the Governor's plan. 

• Lawmakers have called for the state to create a fund to provide wraparound services for the 
(Kildee says 7,000) kids exposed to Flint water situation. Don't know where the 7,000 number 
came from. DHHS has numbers of kids who actually have elevated blood lead levels. Again, not 
an issue we've addressed or plan to. 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 


Subject: 

Attachments: 


Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Tuesday, December 15, 2015 10:32 AM 

Khouri, Nick (TREASURY); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); 
Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Stanton, Terry A. (Treasury); 
Sampson, Jeremy (TREASURY); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) 

FW: PRESS RELEASE- STATE OF EMERGENCY DECLARED 
STATE OF EMERGENCY DECLARATION.pdf 


FYI 


Wayne L. Workman 
Deputy State Treasurer 
Michigan Department of Treasury 


From: Byrne, Randall (Treasury) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 15, 2015 9:50 AM 

To: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) < WorkmanW@michig3n.gov >; Schafer, Suzanne K. (Treasury) 

< SchaferS7@michigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: PRESS RELEASE- STATE OF EMERGENCY DECLARED 


Wayne and Suzanne: 

Miayor Weaver declared a State of Emergency in Flint last night. I have attached a copy for your review, Natasha tried to 
discourage her from proceeding on this, FYI, I am going to call the Mayor on the search. It doesn't sound like she wants 
to use Tom for the search. 


Randy, 


From: Natasha Henderson [rri3iito:nhenderson@cityofflintxorn] 

Sent: Tuesday, December 15, 2015 9:40 AM 

To: Byrne, Randall (Treasury) < ByrneRl@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Fwd: PRESS RELEASE- STATE OF EMERGENCY DECLARED 


Thanks, 


Natasha L. Henderson, City Administrator 
1101 S. Saginaw St. 

Flint, MI 

Email: nhenderson@cityofl1int.com 

Phone: 

www, city offii nt . com 


Forwarded message 

From: "Sean Kammer" < s kamrner @ ci ty oft1irit.corn> 

Date: Dec 14, 2015 10:32 PM 

Subject: PRESS RELEASE- STATE OF EMERGENCY DECLARED 




To: 

Cc: 

Mayor Karen Weaver Declares State of Emergency 


Flint, MI - December 14, 2015 - Mayor Karen Weaver has declared a State of Emergency in response to a 
man-made disaster caused by the City switching to the Flint River as a water source. This switch has resulted in 
elevated lead levels in drinking water which prompted both the City and the County Health department to issue 
a health advisory earlier this year. 


Mayor Weaver states that this was one of the things she had promised to do while campaigning for mayor. 


Declaring an emergency intends to help raise awareness of the issue that the water is still not safe to drink and 
activates the City’s Emergency Support Plan in order to respond to the crisis. 


On October 16 of this year, the City switched back to the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department as the source 
of water, however lead levels remain well above the federal action level of 15 parts per billion in many homes. 
Residents are advised to continue using water filters while long term solutions are being developed. 


The Mayor will hold a press conference about the State of Emergency on Tuesday, December 15 at 2pm at City 
Hall. 


END 


Sean Kenneth Kaimner. MPA 
Assistant to the City Administrator 
City of Flint, Michigan 

1101 S. Saginaw St. 

Flint, MI 48502 




Sean Kammer 
810-237-2025 

skamm&r@cjtyoffjint.eQm 


For Immediate Release 

Mayor Karen Weaver Declares State of Emergency 

Flint, Ml - December 14, 2015 - Mayor Karen Weaver has declared a State of Emergency in 
response to a man-made disaster caused by the City switching to the Flint River as a water 
source. This switch has resulted in elevated lead levels in drinking water which prompted both 
the City and the County Health department to issue a health advisory earlier this year. 

Mayor Weaver states that this was one of the things she had promised to do while campaigning 
for mayor. 

Declaring an emergency intends to help raise awareness of the issue that the water is still not 
safe to drink and activates the City's Emergency Support Plan in order to respond to the crisis. 

On October 16 of this year, the City switched back to the Detroit Water and Sewerage 
Department as the source of water, however lead levels remain well above the federal action 
level of 15 parts per billion in many homes. Residents are advised to continue using water filters 
while long term solutions are being developed. 

The Mayor will hold a press conference about the State of Emergency on Tuesday, December 
15 at 2pm at City Hall. 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Friday, December 18, 2015 3:15 PM 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

RE: 2014 Flint Water Clips 
Switch to Flint water coverage.docx 


The attached includes 2013 clips - there's not many that were searchable. Hope it's still somewhat helpful. 


Have a happy holiday! 


Jess 


From: Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, December 17, 2015 1:10 PM 
To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Agenj {£) michiaari.gov > 
Subject: RE: 2014 Flint Water Clips 


FYI •••■ Alyssa and Alexa are searching for 2013 articles, we unfortunately don't have those from the newsrooms. That's 
from back before we retooled the process there. Should be able to send anything they find by EOB today. 


From: Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, December 17, 2015 10:16 AM 
To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Agenj@michigan,goy > 

Subject: 2014 Flint Water Clips 

Jarrod, 

Attached are the clips I could find on the Flint water switch from March 1 - May 15 in 2014. 

Couldn't find anything on the guy that wanted to bottle it and sell it. If you need more I can keep looking, let me know. 
Jess 


l 



Switch TO Flint Water clips 

From: Jess Brown - Comms. 
Date: December 16, 2015 


MARCH 2013 

Council approves resolution to buy water from Karegnondi, state approval still needed (MLive 

3/25/13) 

Flint is one step closer to getting its water from Lake Huron as part of the Karegnondi Water Authority. 
The vote, approved 7-1 at the Flint City Council meeting Monday, March 25, may have set in motion the 
end to Flint paying to get its water from Detroit. 


APRIL 2013 

Flint residents seeking water bill relief may qualify for new poverty exemption (4/10/13) 
hose in Flint struggling to pay their water bill may be eligible for some financial relief under a new 
program. The "water poverty exemption" was unveiled during emergency manager Ed Kurtz's news 
conference Wednesday, April 10. The city will waive the "ready to use" fee of $53.78 that is charged to 
every customer each month. 

Flint ending Detroit water contract, DWSD looking at its options (Michigan Radio 4/16/13) 

The city of Flint is dumping its contract with the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. Flint 
emergency manager Ed Kurtz signed a contract today to get the city's water from a new pipeline that's 
being built from Lake Huron to Genesee County. Officials with Detroit's system made a final offer to try 
and keep Flint's business. But Kurtz says the numbers were "unreliable." 

Flint, Genesee County officials huddle on Detroit water proposal (MLive) 

Flint and county officials are meeting this morning to consider a proposal for future water purchases 
from the city of Detroit. And while they aren't passing judgment on what's been presented, Mayor 
Dayne Walling said today that "there does not appear to be a fixed rate" for the life of the 30-year 
contract Detroit is seeking. 


JULY 2013 

Flint to spend $171,000 for engineering to treat Flint River water while KWA pipeline is built (MLive - 
7/8/13) 

The city will spend $171,000 to get Flint's water plant up and running on a continual basis, with the 
potential to use the Flint River as the primary drinking water source for about two years while the 
Karegnondi Water Authority pipeline is built. 


Flint River now an option drinking water following Detroit's termination of contract (MLive 7/23/13) 

The Flint River was not a viable option to provide drinking water to city residents when the water 
relationship between Flint and Detroit was stable. But river water might be used temporarily as the 
city's water supply now that Flint signed an agreement with the Karegnondi Water Authority and will get 
up to 18 million gallons per day of raw water in 2016 from Lake Huron. 

MARCH 2014 

Flint will get drinking water from river next month as nearly 50-year-old pact with Detroit ends 

(MLive 3/4/14) 




"I'm just happy that we are going to be using the Flint River for the next couple of years/' Nolden 
told The Flint Journal on Monday, March 4. 


"I don't think the administration was being forthcoming with information. I'm not against the KWA, 
but I just felt like the Flint River was a viable option." 


ndbreaking set for water plant as Flint prepares to start taking drinking water from river (MLive 
3/11/14) 

City residents will begin drinking Flint River water in April, about a month after city officials host a 
groundbreaking ceremony celebrating continuing improvements at the city water treatment plant. 

Flint residents should be drinking Flint River water by mid-April, officials say (MLive 3/12/14) 

If all goes as planned, Flint residents will have Flint River water flowing from their taps by mid-April. 

"This is an important day for us as we break ground on this new project in the city of Flint," said Flint 
Mayor Dayne Walling. "The river is an invaluable asset." 

Flint City councilman calling for rate drop with switch to Flint River water (MLive 3/24/14) 

City Councilman Wantwaz Davis wants to see a drop in what he calls unfair water rates. 

APRIL 2014 

Flint gets final permit approvals from state to use Flint River for drinking water (MLive 4/10/14) 

The state of Michigan has issued the permits needed for the city to begin using the Flint River for 
drinking water, a major step toward ending water purchases from the city of Detroit as early as next 
week. 

Flint water system study recommends water, sewer rate increases (MLive 4/10/14) 

Water and sewer bills in Flint may have to increase more than $50 a year to pay for the services, a 
consultant's report says, because the rates customers are charged now aren't enough to support the 
city's water and sewer system. 

Editorial: Switch to Flint River water represents new era in Flint (MLive 4/13/14) 

When Flint water customers turn on their faucets on or about April 17 (if all goes according to plan), that 
water will originate from the Flint River. 

"The changeover is expected to be virtually unnoticeable but it is important to note that this 
represents a new direction for Flint." 

Flint makes the switch to use river or drinking water (NBC 25 4/17/14) 

It's the first time in nearly 50 years that water from the Flint River is being treated, and used as drinking 
water. 

By the numbers: A look at some of the figures associated with Flint water switch (MLive - 4/18/15) 
hen the valve to allow the Flint River to flow into the city's water treatment plant opened on 
Thursday, April 17, it was marked as a historic day by city officials. 

; the valve on history: Flint cuts water flow from Detroit after nearly 50 years (MLive 4/25/14 - 
This article has good photos) 

It will take two days before Flint residents can taste history. On Friday, April 25, Mayor Dayne 



Walling turned off the flow of water from Detroit and officially ended Flint's nearly 50-year 
dependence on its neighbor to the south. 


"Water is an absolute vital service that most everyone takes for granted," Walling said. "It's 
a historic moment for the city of Flint to return to its roots and use our own river as our 
drinking water supply." 

"There have been a lot of questions from our customers because this is such a major change," he 
said. "When the treated river water starts being pumped into the system, we move from plan to 
reality. The water quality speaks for itself." - Mayor Walling 

"The Flint River is a different river than it was the last time we used it - that was pre-Clean Water 
Act," Flint Utilities Director Daughtery Johnson told The Flint Journal last week, adding that the city 
made two years' worth of improvements at the water plant in nine months. "It's a great system. It's 
a great asset the city has. Every drop we pull out, we're going to clean and put right back in the river. 

Flint officially begins using Flint River water as temporary primary water source (WFNT 4/25/14) 

On Friday, for the first time in fifty years, the City of Flint began using Flint River water as its primary 
water source for residents. The valve to the pipeline from Detroit, which had been providing Flint its 
water, was closed. 

Flint Mayor Dayne Walling who was on hand for the event invited everyone to toast to Flint's water 
saying it's regular, good, pure drinking water that's right in our backyard and "this is the first step in the 
right direction for Flint, as we take this monumental step forward in controlling the future of our 
community's most precious resource." 

Flint begins using own water supply (WNEM - 4/25/14) 

The city will start processing Flint river water and officials hope it will be the source of water for the 
entire city. The Karegnondi water pipeline is scheduled to be completed in 2016. 

"We've got the best technology for treating river water. It was there as a back-up, now we'll be able to 
use for a period of time as a primary supply," says Flint Mayor Dayne Walling. "This is a historic step for 
us. It's the day where we actually turn off the Detroit system and turn on the treated Flint River water 
going into our drinking water supply." 

No. Average residents won't notice any difference. The system, as it's designed, has very complex 
treatment standards and systems built into it. As we've talked before, the plant went through an 
extensive upgrade in the early 2000s," says Flint Utilities Administrator Daugherty Johnson. 


Flint plans to shut off water pipeline from Detroit today (Michigan Radio 4/25/14) 

After a brief delay, the city of Flint will finally start getting its drinking water exclusively from the 
Flint River starting this afternoon. 

Flint mayor takes to Twitter to see how residents like Flint River water (MLive 4/28/15) 

Flint Mayor Dayne Walling is asking people to rate the quality of the city's new water supply. 

"Everything is going fine on the system," said city Spokesman Jason Lorenz. "The water is of great 
quality." Flint will use the river until the KWA builds its pipeline to Genesee County. The $274 million 
project is expected to be complete sometime in 2016. "I'm a resident - I can personally say the water 
quality didn't change at all," Lorenz said. "I didn't notice any difference." 



MAY 2014 

How safe is your tap water? (WNEM 5/16/14) 

We always assume the water coming out of our faucet is safe. But how do we really know? 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 



Saturday, December 19, 2015 7:29 AM 

nkaffer@freepress.com; rmhuschka@freepress.com 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV); cstokes@wxyz.com; devin scillian; 

john.stoll@wsj.com 

RE: When did state know kids in Flint were lead poisoned? 


From: 

To: nkaffer@freepress.com; pegan@freepress.com 

CC: rmhuschka@freepress.com; nbomey@freepress.com; riley@freepress.com; shenderson@freepress.com; 
cstokes@wxyz.com; kvoet@wdiv.com; bdickerson@freepress.com; bmccollum@freepress.com; 
john.stoll@wsj.com; bsnavely@freepress.com; devins@wdiv.com; guyg@wdiv.com; nwarikoo@freepress.com 
Subject: RE: When did state know kids in Flint were lead poisoned? 

Date: Sat, 19 Dec 2015 07:02:53 -0500 

Detroit Free Press, 

Nancy Kaffer; 

Re: When did state know kids in Flint were lead poisoned? 

It's good that MSNBC show host Rachael Maddow dedicated this first 2 segments of her show last night on this 
terrible and dangerous Flint water situation. 

Gov. Snyder is a lying sonofabitches along with is his soon to be former chief of staff who probably had a lot of 
influence on Snyder is signing off on the deal. 

Kudos to Paul Egan and yourself for previously reporting "on March 25, 2013, then-state Treasurer Andy Dillon 
and Gov. Rick Snyder's chief of staff, Dennis Muchmore, held a telephone conversation about "Flint water 
supply alternatives," according to records obtained by the Free Press under FOIA."... " The decision to draw 
water from the Flint River starting in April 2014, combined with a failure by the state Department of 
Environmental Quality to require treatment to soften the water to reduce corrosion and the leaching of lead 
from delivery pipes and other failures related to water testing, ultimately proved disastrous." That spoke 
volumes! 

Snyder's buddy Steve Arwood over at MEDC isn't no better in not releasing the tax credit information on GM, 
this is a government of lies and secrecy that tanks Michigan taxpayers every day we get up. 

Why isn't reporter Nathan Bomey right on Mr. Arwood and Mary Barra's butt in demanding the tax credit 
figures be released? You can't be afraid to ask question on a matter that concerns public policy. This is an 
important issue and Bomey should be working on investigating GM as hard as you are on the Flint water 
crisis. 


l 



Furthermore, Snyder absolutely knew this was happening in Flint back in the spring and summer and he soon 
realized if he were to consider any presidential or VP nomination bid and when this story became public it 
would most certainly tarnished his name in the national spotlight and be a drag the Republican party chances 
to regain control of The White House. 

As you know I have my own bad water concern over at GM and just received an email from the assistant 
director of the DEQ on this matter.l thought I'd share, maybe the Free Press can follow up on this matter as 
well because GM employees were again informed on 12/14/15 not to use or drink the tap water in Building 
7000. Many colleagues are highly alarmed about this situation: 

From: SygoJ@michigan.gov 

Tn- 

CC: EisnerJ@michigan.gov; scottal2@michigan.gov; muchmored@michigan.gov; MurrayDl@michigan.gov; 
pegan@freepress.com; john.stoll@wsj.com; cstokes@wxyz.com; lberman@detnews.com; 
WyantD@michigan.gov; THELENM2@michigan.gov; WurfelB@michigan.gov; BENZIER@michigan.gov; 
DONALDSONK@michigan.gov; SHALERK@michigan.gov; FeuersteinH@michigan.gov; 
DEVEREAUXT@michigan.gov 

Subject: RE: GM Tech Center Build 7000 water main break health concern 
Date: Thu, 17 Dec 2015 19:42:50 +0000 


Dear 

Thank you for your November 22 and November 24, 2015, e-mails to Director Dan Wyant, 

Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ), concerning the General Motors (GM) Tech Center 
drinking water issue. Director Wyant has referred your e-mails to me for response. 

As you may know, the DEQ regulates public water supplies in accordance with the Michigan Safe 
Drinking Water Act, 1 976 PA 399, as amended (Act 399). Public water supplies, like the city of 
Warren, are subject to regulation by the DEQ on all publicly-owned and maintained facilities. The city 
of Warren is responsible for water main leading up to the perimeter of the GM Tech Center 
property. The water system within the GM Tech Center property boundary is not publicly-owned or 
maintained and is considered “customer site piping” as defined in Section 325.1002(f) of Act 
399. Customer site piping is specifically exempted from regulation as a public water supply under Act 
399. Similar to internal plumbing, responsibility for customer site piping lies with the owner of the 
property or facility. In this case, responsibility lies with GM. 

Your November 22 e-mail indicated that GM provided employees with bottled water for consumption 
during repair activities. Additional concerns pertaining to adequate sanitary facilities and access to 
restrooms should be directed to the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs’ Michigan 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (MIOSHA). Concerns related to food service should 
be directed to the Macomb County Health Department. Following are links to the MIOSHA and the 
Macomb County Health Department Web sites: 



Should you require further information concerning public water supply regulation, please contact 
Kristina Donaldson, Southeast Michigan District Supervisor, Field Operations Section, Office of 

2 




Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance (ODWMA), at 
DEQ, 27700 Donald Court, Warren, Michigan 48092. 


donaldsonk@michigan.gov; or 


Jim Sygo 

Chief Deputy Director 
and Interim Chief, ODWMA 
Department of Environmental Quality 


From: 

Sent: Sunday, November 22, 2015 7:22 AM 
To: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Cc: Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS); Scott, Allison (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); pegan@freepress.com; 
john.stoll@wsj.com; cstokes@wxyz.com; lberman@detnews.com 
Subject: GM Tech Center Build 7000 water main break health concern 

State of Michigan, 

Department of Environmental Quality, 

Director Dan Wyant; 

Mr. Wyant, 

Considering that the Detroit print media is reporting that MLK H.S. in Detroit will be closed Monday 11/23/15 
due to a water main leak, why is it that Building 7000 at the GM Tech Center experienced a water main 
break on Friday Nov. 20, 2015 and remained opened for the entire day and the 

+225 GM/Aerotek employees assigned to the 3rd floor were required to work with no city water to use for the 
toilets breaks. 

The employer GM/Aerotek did provide cases of brand name bottled water to use, but many 
GM/Aerotek workers remained highly unsettled and were concerned about possible negative health effects 
and the potential to become ill with no adequate amount of water to use on restroom breaks. There are an 
number of pregnant women working on this floor. 

Wouldn't the GM Tech Center building 7000 be required to undergo testing by the City of Warren Detroit 
Water and Sewerage Department to determine if the building is safe and go through the process of ensuring 
the water feeding into the building meets quality standards? 

Please investigate, find out if requiring GM /Aerotek employees to remain and work in a building with no 
water to use for restroom breaks is legal or did the employer GM/Aerotek not follow protocol and violate the 
law and put GM /Aerotek employees at-risk of a health danger. 


Best regards, 



cc Jennifer Eisner-State of Michigan Dept, of Health and Human Services essnerj@michlgan.gov 


3 





From: 

Sent: 

To: pegan@freepress.com 

Cc: kgray@freepress.com; Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV) 

Subject: RE: When did state know kids in Flint were lead poisoned? 



From: 

To: nkaffer@freepress.com; rmhuschka@freepress.com 

CC: agenj@michigan.gov; scottal2@michigan.gov; cstokes@wxyz.com; devins@wdiv.com; 
john.stoll@wsj.com 

Subject: RE: When did state know kids in Flint were lead poisoned? 

Date: Sat, 19 Dec 2015 07:28:39 -0500 


Detroit Free Press, 

Nancy Kaffer and Paul Egen, 

Re: When did state know kids in Flint were lead poisoned? 

It's good that MSNBC show host Rachael Maddow dedicated this first 2 segments of her show last night on this 
terrible and dangerous Flint water situation. 

Gov. Snyder is a lying sonofabitches along with is his soon to be former chief of staff who probably had a lot of 
influence on Snyder is signing off on the deal. 

Kudos to Paul Egan and yourself for previously reporting "on March 25, 2013, then-state Treasurer Andy Dillon 
and Gov. Rick Snyder's chief of staff, Dennis Muchmore, held a telephone conversation about "Flint water 
supply alternatives," according to records obtained by the Free Press under FOIA."... " The decision to draw 
water from the Flint River starting in April 2014, combined with a failure by the state Department of 
Environmental Quality to require treatment to soften the water to reduce corrosion and the leaching of lead 
from delivery pipes and other failures related to water testing, ultimately proved disastrous." That spoke 
volumes! 

Snyder's buddy Steve Arwood over at MEDC isn't no better in not releasing the tax credit information on GM, 
this is a government of lies and secrecy that tanks Michigan taxpayers every day we get up. 

Why isn't reporter Nathan Bomey right on Mr. Arwood and Mary Barra's butt in demanding the tax credit 
figures be released? You can't be afraid to ask question on a matter that concerns public policy. This is an 
important issue and Bomey should be working on investigating GM as hard as you are on the Flint water 
crisis. 

Furthermore, Snyder absolutely knew this was happening in Flint back in the spring and summer and he soon 


l 



realized if he were to consider any presidential or VP nomination bid and when this story became public it 
would most certainly tarnished his name in the national spotlight and be a drag the Republican party chances 
to regain control of The White House. 

As you know I have my own bad water concern over at GM and just received an email from the assistant 
director of the DEQ on this matter.l thought I'd share, maybe the Free Press can follow up on this matter as 
well because GM employees were again informed on 12/14/15 not to use or drink the tap water in Building 
7000. Many colleagues are highly alarmed about this situation: 

F ro nrSygaJ@micl^ 

To: 

CC: EisnerJ@michigan.gov; scottal2@michigan.gov; muchmored@michigan.gov; MurrayDl@michigan.gov; 
pegan@freepress.com; john.stoll@wsj.com; cstokes@wxyz.com; lberman@detnews.com; 
WyantD@michigan.gov; THELENM2@michigan.gov; WurfelB@michigan.gov; BENZIER@michigan.gov; 
DONALDSONK@michigan.gov; SHALERK@michigan.gov; FeuersteinH@michigan.gov; 
DEVEREAUXT@michigan.gov 

Subject: RE: GM Tech Center Build 7000 water main break health concern 
Date: Thu, 17 Dec 2015 19:42:50 +0000 



Thank you for your November 22 and November 24, 2015, e-mails to Director Dan Wyant, 

Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ), concerning the General Motors (GM) Tech Center 
drinking water issue. Director Wyant has referred your e-mails to me for response. 

As you may know, the DEQ regulates public water supplies in accordance with the Michigan Safe 
Drinking Water Act, 1 976 PA 399, as amended (Act 399). Public water supplies, like the city of 
Warren, are subject to regulation by the DEQ on all publicly-owned and maintained facilities. The city 
of Warren is responsible for water main leading up to the perimeter of the GM Tech Center 
property. The water system within the GM Tech Center property boundary is not publicly-owned or 
maintained and is considered “customer site piping” as defined in Section 325.1002(f) of Act 
399. Customer site piping is specifically exempted from regulation as a public water supply under Act 
399. Similar to internal plumbing, responsibility for customer site piping lies with the owner of the 
property or facility. In this case, responsibility lies with GM. 

Your November 22 e-mail indicated that GM provided employees with bottled water for consumption 
during repair activities. Additional concerns pertaining to adequate sanitary facilities and access to 
restrooms should be directed to the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs’ Michigan 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (MIOSHA). Concerns related to food service should 
be directed to the Macomb County Health Department. Following are links to the MIOSHA and the 
Macomb County Health Department Web sites: 


hitp://health,macomb g oy or q 

Should you require further information concerning public water supply regulation, please contact 
Kristina Donaldson, Southeast Michigan District Supervisor, Field Operations Section, Office of 


2 





Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance (ODWMA), at ^^^^^^^Jdonaldsonk@michigan.gov; or 
DEQ, 27700 Donald Court, Warren, Michigan 48092. 


Jim Sygo 

Chief Deputy Director 
and Interim Chief, ODWMA 
Department of Environmental Quality 


From 

Sent: Sunday, November 22, 2015 7:22 AM 
To: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Cc: Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS); Scott, Allison (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); pegan@freepress.com; 
john.stoll@wsj.com; cstokes@wxyz.com; lberman@detnews.com 
Subject: GM Tech Center Build 7000 water main break health concern 

State of Michigan, 

Department of Environmental Quality, 

Director Dan Wyant; 

Mr. Wyant, 

Considering that the Detroit print media is reporting that MLK H.S. in Detroit will be closed Monday 11/23/15 
due to a water main leak, why is it that Building 7000 at the GM Tech Center experienced a water main 
break on Friday Nov. 20, 2015 and remained opened for the entire day and the 

+225 GM/Aerotek employees assigned to the 3rd floor were required to work with no city water to use for the 
toilets breaks. 

The employer GM/Aerotek did provide cases of brand name bottled water to use, but many 
GM/Aerotek workers remained highly unsettled and were concerned about possible negative health effects 
and the potential to become ill with no adequate amount of water to use on restroom breaks. There are an 
number of pregnant women working on this floor. 

Wouldn't the GM Tech Center building 7000 be required to undergo testing by the City of Warren Detroit 
Water and Sewerage Department to determine if the building is safe and go through the process of ensuring 
the water feeding into the building meets quality standards? 

Please investigate, find out if requiring GM /Aerotek employees to remain and work in a building with no 
water to use for restroom breaks is legal or did the employer GM/Aerotek not follow protocol and violate the 
law and put GM /Aerotek employees at-risk of a health danger. 

Best regards, 


cc Jennifer Eisner-State of Michigan Dept, of Health and Human Services essnerj@michlgan.gov 


3 





From: 

Sent: Saturday, December 19, 2015 7:55 AM 

To: miweek@dptv.org 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); editor@mihomepaper.com 

Subject: RE: When did state know kids in Flint were lead poisoned? 

WDET Channel 56, 

MiWeek, 

Ms. Christy MacDonald, 

Re: Flint Water crisis 

It's good that MSNBC show host Rachael Maddow dedicated this first 2 segments of her show on Fri. 

12/18/15 in exposing this terrible and dangerous Flint water situation. You should be proud to be part of the 
segment shown questioning Gov. Snyder on this terrible crisis that have endangered the lives of so many. 

Gov. Snyder is a lying sonofabitches along with is his soon to be former chief of staff and former Treasury chief 
Andy Dillon who probably had a lot of influence on Snyder is signing off on the deal. 

Kudos to MiWeek for keeping on top of this story and to your MiWeek colleague Stephen Henderson and his 
Detroit Free Press colleagues for previously reporting on this issue. 

Furthermore, Snyder's good time pal Steve Arwood over at MEDC isn't no better in not releasing the tax credit 
information on GM because it is so-called "proprietary information". That boloney because it is taxpayer 
money he is charged in handling. I feel the Snyder regime is a government of lies and secrecy that tanks 
Michigan taxpayers every day we get up. 

The GM tax credit issue is an important public-policy concern that MiWeek should be investigating as well. 

Anyone who follows politics probably figured out a long time ago that Gov. Snyder knew that the Flint water 
pipes were releasing lead back in the spring and summer and he soon realized if he were to consider any 
presidential or VP nomination bid and when this story became public it would most certainly tarnished his 
name in the national spotlight and be a drag the Republican party chances to regain control of The White 
House. 

I would also like to inform MiWeek that I have my own bad water concern over at GM and just received an 
email from the assistant director of the DEQ on this matter.l thought I'd share and MiWeek can follow up on 
this matter as well because GM employees were again informed on 12/14/15 not to use or drink the tap water 
in Building 7000. Many colleagues are highly alarmed about this situation: 

F ro m^ygaJ@mic^ 

CC: Eisnen@micnigar^ov; scottal2@michigan.gov; muchmored@michigan.gov; MurrayDl@michigan.gov; 
pegan@freepress.com; john.stoll@wsj.com; cstokes@wxyz.com; lberman@detnews.com; 
WyantD@michigan.gov; THELENM2@michigan.gov; WurfelB@michigan.gov; BENZIER@michigan.gov; 


l 



DONALDSONK@michigan.gov; SHALERK@michigan.gov; FeuersteinH@michigan.gov; 
DEVEREAUXT@michigan.gov 

Subject: RE: GM Tech Center Build 7000 water main break health concern 
Date: Thu, 17 Dec 2015 19:42:50 +0000 



Thank you for your November 22 and November 24, 2015, e-mails to Director Dan Wyant, 

Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ), concerning the General Motors (GM) Tech Center 
drinking water issue. Director Wyant has referred your e-mails to me for response. 

As you may know, the DEQ regulates public water supplies in accordance with the Michigan Safe 
Drinking Water Act, 1 976 PA 399, as amended (Act 399). Public water supplies, like the city of 
Warren, are subject to regulation by the DEQ on all publicly-owned and maintained facilities. The city 
of Warren is responsible for water main leading up to the perimeter of the GM Tech Center 
property. The water system within the GM Tech Center property boundary is not publicly-owned or 
maintained and is considered “customer site piping” as defined in Section 325.1002(f) of Act 
399. Customer site piping is specifically exempted from regulation as a public water supply under Act 
399. Similar to internal plumbing, responsibility for customer site piping lies with the owner of the 
property or facility. In this case, responsibility lies with GM. 

Your November 22 e-mail indicated that GM provided employees with bottled water for consumption 
during repair activities. Additional concerns pertaining to adequate sanitary facilities and access to 
restrooms should be directed to the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs’ Michigan 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (MIOSHA). Concerns related to food service should 
be directed to the Macomb County Health Department. Following are links to the MIOSHA and the 
Macomb County Health Department Web sites: 

http:/7www. mschsgan.qov/iara/0,4601 ,7-1 54-1 1 407— .OG.html 



Should you require further information concerning public water supply regulation, please contact 
Kristina Donaldson, Southeast Michigan District Superv isor, Field Opera tions Section, Office of 
Drinking Water and Municipal Assistance (ODWMA), at^^^^^^^Jdonaldsonk@michigan.gov; or 
DEQ, 27700 Donald Court, Warren, Michigan 48092. 


Jim Sygo 

Chief Deputy Director 
and Interim Chief, ODWMA 
Department of Environmental Quality 


From: 

Sent: Sunday, November 22, 2015 7:22 AM 
To: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Cc: Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS); Scott, Allison (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); pegan@freepress.com; 
john.stoll@wsj.com; cstokes@wxyz.com; lberman@detnews.com 
Subject: GM Tech Center Build 7000 water main break health concern 


2 




State of Michigan, 

Department of Environmental Quality, 
Director Dan Wyant; 


Mr. Wyant, 

Considering that the Detroit print media is reporting that MLK H.S. in Detroit will be closed Monday 11/23/15 
due to a water main leak, why is it that Building 7000 at the GM Tech Center experienced a water main 
break on Friday Nov. 20, 2015 and remained opened for the entire day and the 

+225 GM/Aerotek employees assigned to the 3rd floor were required to work with no city water to use for the 
toilets breaks. 

The employer GM/Aerotek did provide cases of brand name bottled water to use, but many 
GM/Aerotek workers remained highly unsettled and were concerned about possible negative health effects 
and the potential to become ill with no adequate amount of water to use on restroom breaks. There are an 
number of pregnant women working on this floor. 

Wouldn't the GM Tech Center building 7000 be required to undergo testing by the City of Warren Detroit 
Water and Sewerage Department to determine if the building is safe and go through the process of ensuring 
the water feeding into the building meets quality standards? 

Please investigate, find out if requiring GM /Aerotek employees to remain and work in a building with no 
water to use for restroom breaks is legal or did the employer GM/Aerotek not follow protocol and violate the 
law and put GM /Aerotek employees at-risk of a health danger. 


Best regards, 



cc Jennifer Eisner-State of Michigan Dept, of Health and Human Services ejsnen$£m]<^igan.goy 



3 




From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Monday, December 28, 2015 10:42 PM 
Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

RE: Flint letter 


I meant to eliminate "many" in the first para. Otherwise looks good to me. 

Sent from my Verizon Wireless 4G LIE DROID 

On Dec 28, 2015 10:36 PM, "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" <AgenJ@michigan.gov> wrote: 
10:30 am tomorrow works. 


Draft statement below. Language regarding Dan is included, pending our discussion tomorrow. 


DRAFT STATEMENT 


“When I became aware that the city of Flint’s water showed elevated lead levels and that many the state’s 
handling of the situation was being questioned, 1 appointed an independent task force to investigate how the 
situation evolved and identify missteps and areas for improvement. 


“The task force has done an exceptional job and has been relentless in focusing on the facts. It so far has 
reviewed stacks of documents and interviewed scores of Flint, Genesee County, state and federal officials, and 
keeping me and my team apprised of its progress. 


“Although the task force’s final report is not yet completed, it has made me aware of some interim findings and 
corrective steps that I have decided to take immediately to restore trust in how the state keeps its citizens safe 
and informed. 


“No matter what the testing requirements were, they were not enough to prevent this situation. Moving forward 
we will listen intently and be more responsive to community needs. 


"i am accepting the resignation of MDEQ Director Dan 'Wyant, and have made other personnel changes to 
address problems cited by the task force. 


i 



“Changes in leadership and staff are not enough. I understand there can be disagreements within the scientific 
community. That is why I have directed both the departments of Environmental Quality and Health and Human 
Services to invite every external scientist who has worked on the Flint water issue to be our partners in helping 
us improve Flint water. Let’s share research on water and blood lead level testing to arrive at accurate and 
mutually supported conclusions. Together, we should work to affirm that we’re using the very best testing 
protocols to ensure Flint residents have safe drinking water and that we’re doing proper monitoring and 
remediation of health impacts over the short and long term. 


“I want the Flint community to know how very sorry I am that this has happened. And I want all Michigan 
citizens to know that we will learn from this experience, because Flint is not the only city that has an aging 
infrastructure containing lead lines. 


“Em taking the actions today to ensure a culture of openness and trust. We’ve already allocated $10 million to 
test the water, distribute water filters, and help in other ways. Last week, I called Flint Mayor Karen Weaver, 
and we’re going to meet soon to discuss other ways the state can offer assistance. 


“These are only initial steps - we fully expect to take more actions following the recommendations of our task 
force. When it comes to matters of health and quality of life, we’re committed to doing everything we can to 
protect the well-being of our citizens.” 


From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, December 28, 2015 10:24 PM 
To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) • 

Cc: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov>; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Scott, Allison 
(GOV) <scottal2@michigan.gov> 

Subject: Re: Flint letter 


10:30 good by me. 


Sent from my Verizon Wireless 4G LIE DROID 


2 



On Dec 28, 2015 10:14 PM, "Snyder, Rick (GOV)" 

If it works, let's do a call at 10:30 tomorrow. Also, please send me the latest version of my proposed 
statement. 


Thanks 

Rick 

Sent from my iPad 


On Dec 28, 2015, at 8:24 PM, Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Agen J@michi gan. gov > wrote: 

Governor, 

Attached is a letter from the Flint Water Task Force which will be formally sent to you 
tomorrow. The Task Force then plans to release this letter publicly on Wednesday morning. 

You will see the letter is harsh against DEQ. 

Rich, Redford, Harvey, Meegan, and myself all just gathered on a conference call to discuss our 
upcoming actions regarding Flint. While we don't think this letter should change any of our 
actions, we agreed we may need to accelerate some of the structural changes at DEQ. 

Our suggestions: 

1) Make structural changes at DEQ as early as tomorrow: The recommendations in this 
letter suggest profound change at DEQ and openly criticize Director Wyant. If this is the path 
that the Task Force is on, it is best to make changes at DEQ sooner rather than later. That likely 
means accepting Dan's resignation. It also means moving up the termination of the 3 DEQ 
personal previously planned for Jan 4 to tomorrow. 


2) Still do statement tomorrow from you regarding Flint: This statement will be slightly 
revised by Meegan to acknowledge we received feedback from the Task Force and reiterate that 
we created the Task Force with the intent of getting honest independent feedback. More 
importantly, if we are making changes at DEQ, they can also be announced in the statement. 


If you have a moment, it is probably best that Rich & I discuss with you over the phone 
tomorrow morning. But I wanted to get you some of our thinking tonight. 


Let me know if there is a good time to discuss tomorrow. 


3 


Thanks 


Jarrod 


<Snyder Letter EPR v5-Clean.docx> 


4 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Holland, Meegan (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 29, 2015 5:36 PM 
Baird, Richard (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 
RE: Letter of resignation -- Wurfel 


The Detroit News has Brad resigning in this story. The story aiso quotes Edwards and Dr. Mona, saying Dan shouldn't 
necessarily have been fired. (!) 

Ananich criticises the culture of the DEG., and very much echoes the task force report. 

Meegan 


From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 29, 2015 5:30 PM 

To: Holland, Meegan (GOV) < HoilandM2@nriichigan.gov >; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: Letter of resignation -- Wurfel 


From: Wurfel, Brad (DEQ) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 29, 2015 5:15 PM 
To: Winters, Jan (MCSC) 

Cc: Sygo, Jim (DEQ); Eyer, Tamara (DEQ); Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ); Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Subject: Letter of resignation -- Wurfel 

Ms. Winters, 

It has been an honor and a privilege to serve the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality as 
Communications Director for the past five years. 

I’m quite proud of countless accomplishments this team has achieved. 

However, I am tendering my two weeks’ notice, effective January 16, 2016. 

Thank you all for a great run. Best wishes in the new year, 
b 


Brad Wurfel 

Communications Director, 

Michigan Department of Environmental Quality 

wurfelb@rnlchigan.gov 



l 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Thursday, October 01, 2015 9:46 AM 
Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
Flint 


Are we good on plan to discuss lead levels tomorrow? 

If you need me to chime in, let me know.... 

If you have any messaging that you want G to review on the plane, just shoot it over. 


l 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Thursday, October 01 , 201 5 1 0:47 AM 
Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Re: Flint 


Question from the G: 

Can we definitively say that no WATER tests have ever shown levels that are above the Federal/EPA standards? 

I think Dan alluded to this in the meeting when he said we were testing at 11 and the federal mark is 15 or above. But 
Gov wants to know if we can make the claim above. 


> On Oct 1, 2015, at 9:06 AM, Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfeis@rriichig3n.gov > wrote: 

> 

> Not yet, but hopefully will be. Think got Dennis and Harvey on same page about tying in other HHS/Hurley news to part 
of action plan on Friday's announcement. DEQand DHHS teams trying to finalize policy and messaging drafts now for 
review. 1:30 p.m. mtg to walk through details and see where at. 

> 

> Also - heads up and FYI - we just had a major protocol and near security breach with WJRTTV 12 getting up to 2nd floor 
without our knowledge or escort. Apparently DK Security and other EO team though they were part of pastors meeting 
happening. (Apparently invited by the pastors). That's caused some excitement have been dealing with. They're on our 
comms floor now - doing a stand up with them and letting them catch pastors after meeting outside. 

> 

> Original Message 

> From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

> Sent: Thursday, October 01, 2015 9:46 AM 

> To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfeis@michigan.gov >: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) < demente@micbigan.gov > 

> Subject: Flint 

> 

> Are we good on plan to discuss lead levels tomorrow? 

> If you need me to chime in, let me know.... 

> 

> If you have any messaging that you want G to review on the plane, just shoot it over. 

> 

> 


l 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Thursday, October 01, 2015 7:02 PM 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Fwd: Flint 


I don't want to just forward this email to Wyant, but Governor just ask to make sure that he had all this info. 
Does Dan have all this? 


Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" < muchfriored@michigan.ROv > 

Date: October 1, 2015 at 1:30:40 PM PDT 
To: "Snyder, Rick 

Cc: "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < Ageni@miebigan,gov >, "Posthumus, Dick (GOV)" 

<pQf.thumusd@fyjlchigan.gov>, "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" <demerite@michig3n.gov>, "Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV)" <hoil i nsh @ m lchigan.gov> 

Subject: Flint 

I talked with Dayne Walling at length today a few minutes ago, and Harvey and I had separate meetings 
with one of the Flint minister groups and then Rep. Neely. Our conversations were cordial for the most 
with the normal concerns being expressed. I told Rep. Neely that I felt he hadn't gotten enough respect 
and insight into our thoughts on this and we expanded our backgrounder for him and he was very 
appreciative. He actually cancelled a Black Caucus meeting called for today on this due to Harvey and 
our meeting. I have Dan and Nick calling him just to update. 

More importantly, we have the proposal back from DWSD for a reconnect: 

1. Short term reconnect is ok until KWA starts operating; 

2. No reconnect fee and immediate reconnect; 

3. Expenses incurred at actual cost although no estimate at this time 

4. A fixed monthly rate of $662,100 + a commodity rate of $8.93mcf for current 15-16 FY; 

5. Rate is over and above water sales to Genesee County Drain Commission; 

6. A water wholesale adjustment; 

7. Only extends to Flint; 

8. Rates for 16-17 FY would be the same as other customers. 

Mayor Duggan is more than willing to lend his support. 

I'm asking Saxton for a ballpark calculation. We would have to find them the money for this reconnect, 
but Dayne is more than open (as is Ananich to a lesser degree) to finding some revolving fund that they 
would repay perhaps on an extended basis or maybe using some guarantee to reduce the borrowing 
costs. 


From: 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, October 06, 2015 8:20 AM 

To: 

Scott, Allison (GOV) 

Cc: 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Flint Water updates 


Update from Dan in briefing. Comms to also send update for briefing on stories or announcements upcoming. But Dan 
will have most accurate testing and analysis details to report. 


> On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:14 AM, Scott, Allison (GOV) < scottal2(S> rnichig3n.gov > wrote: 

> 

> What is most effective accurate rout? Dan provided update for briefing each day or does Comms shop speak to DEQ 
Comms and provide? 

> 

> Sent from my iPhone 

> 

» On Oct 6, 2015, at 8:05 AM, Snyder, Rick (GOV) '^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^wrote: 

» 

» We need a better update system re Flint Water. 

» 

» I saw in the press this am that DH HS announced yesterday that water filters would start being given out today. This 
should have come internally with more detail. I had press questions last night. 

» 

» Overall, we should have a daily report on Flint until our recommendations are fully implemented. 

» 

» For example: 

» 1. What are the water test results from the public schools? 

» 2. Flow many free test have been requested? Flow many have been done? Flow many remain and how long have 
they been waiting? What are the results - no lead, lead consistent with history, higher levels? 

» 3. Flow many filters have been distributed? Flow many unfulfilled requests? 

» 4. New blood test results? Especially in the two zip codes. 

» 5. Analysis of tech advisory group 
» 6. Analysis of the GLWA vs. Flint River vs. KWA. 

» 

» Thanks 
» Rick 
» 

» Sent from my iPad 


l 



From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 06, 2015 5:09 PM 

To: Murray, David (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT 

PRIVILEGED 


This may be helpful in crafting materials. 


Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" < WyantD@michigan.OQv > 

Date: October 6, 2015 at 5:05:10 PM EDT 

To: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" < scotta1 2@michigan.gov >, "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 
< muchmored@michjgan.gov >, "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < AgenJ@michigan.gov >, 
"Dickinson, Sarah (GOV)" < DickinsQnS@fflichlgan.goy > 

Subject: Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 
ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

The Flint Drinking Water Action Plan was announced on October 2, 201 5. It included 
the following: 

• Testing in Flint public schools immediately 

• Offered free water testing to Flint residents 

• Provided free water filters to residents with concerns or who are included in state 
assistance programs 

• Expanding health exposure testing of individual homes 

• Accelerating corrosion controls in the Flint drinking water system 

• Accelerating water system improvements to address replacing lead service lines 

• Expediting the completion of the Karegnondi Water Authority pipeline 

• Expanding a Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee 

• Named Dr. Eden Wells as the Flint drinking water public health advisor 

• Boosted a comprehensive lead education program 

Testing in Flint Public Schools Immediately 

Samples were taken on October 2 and were received at DEQ laboratory over the 
weekend. Test results to date indicate 37 samples tested, 4 of which exceeded a 
federal action level, and 1 of those 4 was a significant outlier. We will be compiling 
detailed information about which schools and area codes the test results came from and 
will be providing that information in our next update. 

We have met with DHFIS, and we are working on developing response protocols, a 
communications plan, and guidance for schools when this data is reported. 

Offered Free Water Testing to Flint Residents 

i 



We have received 4 sets of samples from Flint that represent individual residents. We 
will be compiling the total number and the results of those samples and reporting in a 
future report. 

Provided Free Water Filters to Residents with Concerns or Who are Included in State 
Assistance Programs 


DHHS held organizational meetings in Flint on October 5, and filter distribution by 
DHHS started on October 6. Nick Lyon in DHHS is taking the lead in filter distribution. 

Expanding Health Exposure Testing of Individual Homes 

Dr. Wells and Dan Wyant have been in conversations about a protocol for exposure 
testing. Dr. Wells will take the lead on developing the protocol. 

Accelerating Corrosion Controls in the Flint Drinking Water System 


A conference call was held with U.S. EPA Regional Administrator Susan Hedman 
and national corrosion control experts. We asked two questions: 

1 . Which is a safer water source - DWSD or Flint River? 

2. If you don’t have an opinion on the safer source, what criteria should we 
use for an evaluation? 

EPA staff would not commit to a preference, but their evaluation of the criteria 
clearly lead to the conclusion that DWSD was a safer water source. EPA 
committed to submitting technical assistance to the Safe Drinking Water 
Technical Advisory Committee (Advisory Committee) meeting, which will be held 
on October 7 at 2:00 p.m. in Flint City Hall. 

DEQ met with the Flint Mayor, the city manager, and their water staff. Flint agreed 
to expediting corrosion controls. We discussed the agenda for the Advisory 
Committee meeting. The Advisory Committee will be asked to evaluate two 
respective water sources at their Wednesday meeting. 

We expect the Advisory Committee to recommend the water source that would 
address not only lead safety but also other water safety issues. 

Accelerating Water System Improvements to Address Replacing Lead Service Lines 

Conversations with Congressman Kildee and EPA have clarified the state would be 
allowed to use Drinking Water Revolving Loan funds to replace private drinking water 
service lines. Senator Ananich has been approached to introduce language clarifying 
the state’s authority. 

Expediting the Completion of the Karegnondi Water Authority Pipeline 

Dan Wyant has talked to Genesee County Drain Commissioner Jeff Wright. Mr. Wright 
has provided a list of issues that would help expedite the completion of the Karegnondi 


2 




Water Authority pipeline. They include truck weight and frost law exemptions, talent 
identification, and expediting permits. 

Expanding a Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee 

EPA has appointed their national technical expert to the Advisory Committee, and we 
have appointed Alfred Franzblau, M.D., Professor of Environmental Health Services, 
University of Michigan, to the Advisory Committee. 

Named Dr. Eden Wells as the Flint Drinking Water Public Health Advisor 


Boosted a Comprehensive Lead Education Program 


Other Updates 

• Dan Wyant was interviewed on October 6 by CBS Evening News during filter 
distribution in Flint. Questions asked were: 

o Was it a mistake to go to Flint River water? 

Answer: We draw water from the surface waters; we treat it to safe 
drinking water standards. At issue is lead exposure. Lead exposure must 
be addressed. Actions are being taken to address the issue, 
o Did you put kids at risk? 

Answer: Lead exposure is a serious issue, and steps need to be taken to 
limit lead exposure, 
o Why did it take so long? 

Answer: DEQ has been there from the beginning addressing the issue of 
Flint water. Recent tests justify and require the actions taken. Action 
steps address short-term, intermediate, and long-term lead issues to 
ensure public safety and confidence of the drinking water. 

• Dan Wyant also spoke to the Governor about Flint funding needs. A meeting is 
scheduled for October 7 at 8:00 a.m. to further discuss proposals. 


• What we are telling Flint citizens is: 
o Have your water tested 

o Use only cold water for drinking, cooking, and preparing formula 
o Run water before use if it has not been used for several hours 
o Obtain a water filter approved for lead removal 
o Purchase lead-free plumbing components 
o Remove entire lead service lines 


3 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Wednesday, October 07, 2015 7:16 PM 
Murray, David (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Fwd: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 
151008 Flint water release_V2.docx; ATT00001.htm 


Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Baird, Richard (GOV)" <bairdr@rfiichi fian. g ov > 

Date: October 7, 2015 at 7:12:04 PM EDT 

To: "Hollins, Harvey (GOV)" <hoiliosh@miehifian,goy>, "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < Agent @ m i chi ga n .goy>, 
"Biehl, Laura (GOV)" < B i e h \ L.@ m i ch i ga n . go v> , "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" <muchmored@michigarj.gov>, 
"Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" < demente@mi chi gan.gov > 

Subject: Fwd: URGENT review please - Draft Flint water release 

I think this looks good but are we missing an opportunity to shout out all the entities that have stepped 
up to help? GM, Home Depot, etc. etc.? 

If Harvey has the full list, perhaps it could even be attached as an addendum. The point is that a lot of 
people did come together to address the problem, including the private sector and various volunteer 
organizations. I think it says something special about this state rallying to help one of its cities. 

Rich 

Sent from my iPad 
Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Biehl, Laura (GOV)" < Biehll@michigan.goy> 

Date: October 7, 2015 at 6:46:28 PM EDT 

To: "Murray, David (GOV)" <Murraypl@ "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" 

< M?.Qj.^M?b.!£?.P.:gov>, "Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" <Wurf§jl@n "Heaton, Anna 

(GOV)" <.Hejj.pr:A@m "Kennedy, Jordan (GOV)" 

"Brown, Jessica (GOV)" <Browm53 

"Paciorek, Josh (GOV)" < p3dorekl@mlchigan.gov >. "Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS)" 
< jasherfi@rnichigan.gov >. "Minicuci, Angela (DHHS)" < MinicudA@michlgan.goy >, 
"Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS)" < E5snerJ@rriichigan.gov >, "Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" 

< W u rfe \ s @ m i ch iga n . gov > , "Tommasulo, Karen (DEQ)" < T orn m a su ! o K @ m ich i ga n . go v > , 

"Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" < d em e nte @ m ich iga n . gov > , "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 
< muchmorsd@michigan.goy >. "Posthumus, Dick (GOV)" < Posthumusd@michigan.gov >, 

"Baird, Richard (GOV)" < bairdr@michig3n,gov >, "Calley, Brian (GOV)" 

"Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV)" < forstnernl@mlchigan.goy > 

Subject: RE: URGENT review please — Draft Flint water release 


l 



See new version attached. Small revisions made and placeholders added for Mayor and 
Mott Foundation Quotes. 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 6:12 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@rniehigari.goy >; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

< Wit rfei s @ m I eh iga n . go v > ; Biehl, Laura (GOV) • 


>; Heaton, Anna 

(GOV) < HeatonA@rriichig3n.gov >: Kennedy, Jordan (GOV) < Kennadvi4@rnidTgan.gov >; 

Brown, Jessica (GOV) < B ro wn J S3 @ ft - ichiga n .go v > ; Paciorek, Josh (GOV) 
< Padorekj@ndehigan.gov >; Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS) < lasherg@friichigan.gov >: Minicuci, 
Angela (DHHS) < MinicudA@mlchigan.gov >: Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS) 

< E i s n e rj @ m i ch i ga n. go v > ; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wit rf ei s @ m ich i ga n. gov > ; Tommasulo, 
Karen (DEQ) < TomrriasuioK@fritchigan.gov >: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
< demente@mlchigan.gov >: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@rtiichigan.gov >: 
Posthumus, Dick (GOV) < Posth u ft; usd @ ft: i ch i ga n . gov > : Baird, Richard (GOV) 

A: .-jAA :.V J Calley, Brian (GOV) 

Nathaniel (GOV) < forstneml@rriichigan.gov > 

Subject: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 


Team, 


Please review this draft press release for the Thursday announcement in Flint. This 
incorporates some suggested edits to the strong draft from DEQ earlier today. 

Thank you very much. 


Gov. Rick Snyder: Move back to Detroit 
water provides best protection for public 

health in Flint 

State, Mott Foundation and city form partnership to fund 

switch 


FLINT, Mich. - Flint families and children will be better protected by reconnecting 
with the Great Lakes Water Authority as the source of the city’s drinking water, 
Gov. Rick Snyder said. 

Snyder said Thursday that he will request the state Legislature to provide a 
portion of the $12 million needed to reconnect with the authority, with the Flint 
city government providing $2 million and the Charles Stewart Mott Foundation 
donating $4 million. 

The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of 
Environmental Quality today also committed an additional $3.5 million for water 
filters, free lead testing through the state laboratory for Flint water customers, 
and hiring additional staff to conduct health exposure monitoring for lead in 
drinking water. 

Flint city leaders requested the state’s help to fund the reconnection after a 
Wednesday meeting of Flint’s Technical Advisory Committee. Flint’s move to the 


2 


Great Lakes Water Authority is expected to cost about $1 .3 million per month 
until the Karegnondi Water Authority is completed next summer. 

“All Flint residents need clean, safe drinking water,” Snyder said. “The technical 
experts helping the city on its water advisory all agree this move back to the 
Great Lakes Water Authority provides the best public health protection for 
children and families. This effort today is the result of people coming together to 
solve a problem. I appreciate Detroit’s willingness to reconnect with Flint, the 
Mott Foundation’s generous donation, and the dedication of all parties to come 
together to protect Flint families and children.” 

The move to Detroit water, which is drawn from Lake Huron, carries many public 
health benefits. As large bodies of water, the Great Lakes are naturally prone to 
fewer problems from large rain events and other runoff issues that can be 
present in shallower rivers. Additionally, the Great Lakes Water Authority has 
already fully optimized its corrosion control, using phosphates to help coat the 
insides of pipes and prevent lead from leaching into the water. 

However, reconnecting with the authority will not completely resolve the city’s 
problem with lead service lines or aging infrastructure. It will take time for pipes in 
Flint to become coated with the phosphate corrosion control. Additionally, some 
households in the city could experience lead in their drinking water until all lead 
pipes and plumbing are replaced. 

To best protect public health, Snyder said state and local authorities will continue 
to carry out steps outlined on Oct. 2 in a comprehensive action plan, including 
continued testing, the use of faucet filters and providing residents with accurate 
information about steps to eliminate lead in water. 

Free filters are available for current MDHHS clients at the 125 E. Union St. or 
4809 Clio Road MDHHS office locations. 

For residents who are not currently enrolled in MDHHS assistance programs, 
free filters are available at the Genesee County Community Action Resource 
Department offices at 2727 Lippincott and 601 North Saginaw in Flint. Staff will 
be at all four locations from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, to distribute 
filters and assist residents who have questions about proper installation. 

At the Lippincott location only, extended hours will be offered this weekend, 
including until 7 p.m. on Thursday and Friday and from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. on 
Saturday. 

Other good practices for residents concerned about lead include turning on the 
cold water tap and running the water until it’s as cold as it will go. Additionally, 
only use cold water for cooking, drinking and especially mixing baby formula. 

School test results released; more investigation planned 

The state today also released the first results from its lead screening program in 
schools and homes. Of 37 total samples taken at 13 buildings, four samples 
spread over three buildings exceeded the federal action level of 15 parts per 
billion. 

However, this sampling provides only an initial screen, and the state is 
committing to further testing water and inspecting plumbing at these schools. 


3 



Until testing is complete, schools are advised to continue using bottled water and 
filtration as a precaution to protect children. 


In addition, free testing is still available for any other Flint school, including 
daycares and Head Starts. Free testing is also available for any Flint resident. 

Additional information, including more detailed lead screening results, is available 

at wmv.michiaan.gov/fjintvvater . 

ii ii ii 

Ti ll it 

IT II IT 


Dave Murray 

Deputy Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 
Mur.ravDl^ 

517-335-6397, office 

Twitter:@michigandmurray 


4 


RICK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 


State or Michigan 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE 

LANSING 


BRIAN GALLEY 

LT. GOVERNOR 


CONTACTS: 

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 

Sara Wurfel or Dave Murray 

Governor’s Office: 517-335-6397 

Thursday, Oct. 8, 2015 

Brad Wurfel. 517-284-6713 
Department of Environmental Quality 


Jennifer Eisner, 517-230-9804 
Department of Health and Human Services 



Gov. Rick Snyder: Move back to Detroit water 
provides best protection for public health in Flint 

State, Mott Foundation and city form partnership to fund switch 


FLINT, Mich. - Flint families and children will be better protected by reconnecting with the Great 
Lakes Water Authority as the source of the city’s drinking water, Gov. Rick Snyder said. 

Snyder said Thursday that he will request the state Legislature to provide half, or $6 million, of 
the $12 million needed to reconnect with the authority. The Flint city government will provide $2 
million and the Charles Stewart Mott Foundation will donate $4 million. 

“All Flint residents need clean, safe drinking water,” Snyder said. “The technical experts helping 
the city on its water advisory all agree this move back to the Great Lakes Water Authority 
provides the best public health protection for children and families. This effort today is the result 
of people coming together to solve a problem. I appreciate Detroit’s willingness to reconnect 
with Flint, the Mott Foundation’s generous donation, and the dedication of all parties to come 
together to protect Flint families and children.” 

The Michigan Departments of Environmental Quality and Health and Human Services today 
also committed an additional $3.5 million for water filters, free lead testing through the state 
laboratory for Flint water customers, and hiring additional staff to conduct health exposure 
monitoring for lead in drinking water. 

Flint city leaders requested the state’s help to fund the reconnection after a Wednesday meeting 
of Flint’s Technical Advisory Committee. Flint’s move to the Great Lakes Water Authority is 
expected to cost about $1.3 million per month until the Karegnondi Water Authority is completed 
next summer. 

INSERT MAYOR QUOTE HERE 

The move to Detroit water, which is drawn from Lake Huron, carries many public health 
benefits. As large bodies of water, the Great Lakes are naturally prone to fewer problems from 
large rain events and other runoff issues that can be present in shallower rivers. Additionally, 
the Great Lakes Water Authority has already fully optimized its corrosion control, using 
phosphates to help coat the insides of pipes and prevent lead from leaching into the water. 




However, reconnecting with the authority will not completely resolve the city’s problem with lead 
service lines or aging infrastructure. It will take time for pipes in Flint to become coated with the 
phosphate corrosion control. Additionally, some households in the city could experience lead in 
their drinking water until all lead pipes and plumbing are replaced. 

INSERT MOTT FOUNDATION QUOTE HERE 

To best protect public health, Snyder said state and local authorities will continue to carry out 
steps outlined on Oct. 2 in a comprehensive action plan, including continued testing, the use of 
faucet filters and providing residents with accurate information about steps to eliminate lead 
exposure. 

Free filters are available for current MDHHS clients at the 125 E. Union St. or 4809 Clio Road 
MDHHS office locations. For residents who are not currently enrolled in MDHHS assistance 
programs, free filters are available at the Genesee County Community Action Resource 
Department offices at 2727 Lippincott and 601 North Saginaw in Flint. Staff will be at all four 
locations from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, to distribute filters and assist residents 
who have questions about proper installation. At the Lippincott location only, extended hours will 
be offered this weekend, including until 7 p.m. on Thursday and Friday and from 10 a.m. to 2 
p.m. on Saturday. 

Other good practices for residents concerned about lead include turning on the cold water tap 
and running the water until it’s as cold as it will go. Additionally, only use cold water for cooking, 
drinking and especially mixing baby formula. 

School test results released; more investigation planned 

The state today also released the first results from its lead screening program in schools and 
homes. Of 37 total samples taken at 13 buildings, four samples spread over three buildings 
exceeded the federal action level of 15 parts per billion. 

However, this sampling provides only an initial screen, and the state is committing to further 
testing water and inspecting plumbing at these schools. Until testing is complete, schools are 
advised to continue using bottled water and filtration as a precaution to protect children. 

In addition, free testing is still available for any other Flint school, including daycares and Head 
Starts. Free testing is also available for any Flint resident. 

Additional information, including more detailed lead screening results, is available at 

www.michiqan.gov/flintwater . 



From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 7:18 PM 

To: Murray, David (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT 

PRIVILEGED 

Attachments: City of Flint Water Funding Solution.pdf; ATT00001.htm; FLINT SCHOOL TESTING 

RESULTS. DOCX; ATT00002.htm; Drinking Water Regulations for Monitoring of Lead in 
Schools and Child C....doc; ATT00003.htm; Response to Corrosion Control 
Questions.docx; ATT00004.htm; Fwd: TAC Meeting Highlights; ATT00005.htm; CC 
Meeting Minutes 3-25-2013 (l).doc; ATT00006.htm; Flint.pdf; ATT00007.htm; KWA 
Contract (amended) 130165.2. pdf; ATT00008.htm 


Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" < WvantD^rnichigan.gov > 

Date: October 7, 2015 at 7:09:27 PM EDT 

To: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" < scottal2@rnichigan.gov >, "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 
< muchmored@michigan.gov >, "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < Agenj^ 1 2 3 4 5 6 rnichigan.gov >, "Dickinson, Sarah (GOV)" 
< DickinsonS(&rnicbigan.gov >. "Emmitt, Beth (GOV)" < ernmittb@niichigan.gov > 

Subject: Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

Governor Snyder, 

I wanted to provide you with the attached documents to address a number of the 
questions that you are asking today. A full briefing for the press conference, including 
press release, talking points, run of show, and frequently asked questions, will be 
provided by your team. Included in this e-mail are the following attachments: 

1. Flint Drinking Water FY 2016 supplemental budget request summary 

2 . Summary of the Flint schools water testing results and our response to the 
results 

3. Drinking water regulations for monitoring lead in schools and child care centers 

4. Response to the questions on corrosion control 

5. Summary of today’s Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee meeting 

6. Flint City Council Minutes from March 25, 2013; the Resolution to Purchase 
Capacity from Karegnondi Water Authority; and the Amended Contract 

Other Updates 

Mayor Duggan and Sue McCormick of DWSD were contacted, briefed, and are 
supporting tomorrow’s announcement. Both have indicated they would provide positive 
comments supporting the decision. 


i 



Dan Wyant 



City of Flint Water - Funding Solution 
State of Michigan Commitment 


Agency 

i GF/GP : 

Gross ; 

j Comments 

l 

1 

I 

i i 

i l 

i I 

1 

1 

1 

l 

1 

1 

Filters: ; 

i i 

i i 

i i 

1 

1 

; 

i 

1 

Health & Human Services j 

j $1,016,000! 

$1,016,000! 

JAY15 work project 

1 

Health & Human Services j 

i so| 

1 1 

$ 1 , 000 , 000 ! 

!DEQ State Restricted Settlement Funds provided to HHS Emergency 
! 

jServices local office (FY16 appropriation). 

Subtotal Filters:! 

$1,016,000 1 

$2,016,000j 

1 

l 

i 

1 

1 1 
1 1 

1 

1 

l 

l 

i 

i 

; 

1 1 

1 1 

; i 

1 

1 

l 

1 

i 

Reconnect to DSW: ; 

1 

■ i 

■ i 

■ i 

■ i 

■ i 

i i 

■ 

1 

■ 

1 

1 

1 

i Reconnection costs ~$1.3m/month x 9 mos. to be shared by state & 
1 Flint 

Environmental Quality • 

: $5,000,000! 

$ 6 , 000 , 000 ! 

!DEQ State Restricted Settlement Fund of $lm; balance GF/GP 

Subtotal Reconnect:! 

$5,000,000| 

$6,000,000 1 

1 

1 

I 

1 1 
1 1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

Testing Costs: ' 

1 1 

1 

1 

Environmental Quality ; 

SI.OOO.OOOI 

$1,000,000! 

! Additional tests at state lab; cost per sample: $26 

Subtotal Testing:! 

$1,000,000! 

$ 1 , 000 , 000 ! 

1 

1 

1 

I 

1 1 
1 1 

i 

1 

1 

i 

1 

1 

Additional Agency Support: 

1 1 
1 1 
1 1 

1 

1 

■ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

LARA i 

1 

1 

1 

1 

! $0! 

1 1 

1 1 

j 1 

1 

1 

1 

$ 200 , 000 ! 

1 

1 

1 

■ Support for plumbing inspectors to do schools (public and parochial) and 
| health facilities (hospitals, Long Term Care, etc.). 

MSHDA 

$0! 

$249,900? 

1 

l 

Health & Human Services 

! $600,000! 

$600,000; 

(Follow-up on children with elevated blood levels 

Environmental Quality j 

$300.000j 

$300,000 j 

(Home and school inspections. 

Subtotal Additional Support:! 

$ 900 , 000 ! 

$1,349,900! 

1 

l 

i 

■ 

1 1 

1 1 

■ 

■ 

l 

1 

■ 

i 

1 1 

1 1 

■ 

1 

l 

l 

ALL TOTAL 

L L 

i $7,916,000! 

i I- 

$10,365,900: 

l 

l 

1 

J J 


5:52 PM 10/7/2015 


PRELIMINARY DRAFT 



FLINT SCHOOL TESTING RESULTS: 


WHAT DID WE FIND? 

1) The results of the initial screening conducted over the course of the last week are consistent with the 
last round of community lead and copper testing. 

2) There were a total of 37 samples taken from 13 schools. Of those 37 samples, 4 exceeded the 15 ppb 
action level. There were 3 schools that had samples exceeding the action level: Eisenhower Elementary 
(which had two samples exceeding 15 ppb). Brownell STEM Academy and Freeman Elementary each 
had one sample exceeding 15 PPB. The sample from Freeman Academy was significantly higher than 
the other samples at 101 PPB. 

3) Looking at the data from a health based perspective, the data clearly demonstrates that more 
detailed sampling needs to occur so that the various sources of lead contamination contained within 
each respective school's plumbing can be identified and addressed. 


WHAT DOES THE DATA MEAN? 

1) The data underscores the need for a complete and thorough evaluation of the plumbing system 
within each school. 

2) We have developed a protocol for evaluating the plumbing systems and we will be working with 
schools to implement these protocols and to assist them in determining a corrective action plan to 
address this issue. 

3) The State is identifying staff within DEQ, DHHS, LARA and Local County Health Departments to assist 
schools in conducting evaluations of their plumbing systems. 


WHAT IS YOUR PROTOCOL? 

1) DEQ's protocols are based on similar work done in Michigan and in other States. 

2) Multiple samples from each tap used for cooking or drinking water will be collected at prescribed 
intervals to identify levels of lead and its likely source. 

3) Once an evaluation is complete, we will be able to assist each School in developing a comprehensive 
plan to address issues on a site specific basis. 


HOW DO SCHOOLS RESPOND? 



1) Schools should continue protective measures that are currently in place until a complete study can be 
conducted at each school. This includes the continued use of bottled water for consumption purposes. 


2) We will be reaching out to schools to schedule a complete evaluation, assessment and sampling, of 
their plumbing systems. 



Drinking Water Regulations for Monitoring of Lead in Schools and Child Care Centers 


There is no federal or Michigan law requiring sampling of drinking water in schools that receive water from 
other public water systems, although schools that have their own water supply are subject to regulation and 
sampling as non-community public water systems. Schools served by a public water system may be included 
as a sampling site (i.e., tap) for a public water system’s lead and copper monitoring program if there are 
insufficient single-family homes that qualify. There are no federal requirements for more extensive testing. 

The 1986 Amendments to the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) required EPA to develop regulations to control 
for lead in drinking water. The Lead and Copper Rule (LCR), issued in 1991, is focused on controlling 
corrosion within the distribution system that delivers water to customers. The 1986 SDWA Amendments also 
required that only lead-free materials be used in new plumbing and in plumbing repairs. 

In 1988, the SDWA was further amended by the Lead Contamination Control Act (LCCA), to reduce the 
exposure of lead to children in schools and child care facilities. The LCCA prohibited the sale of any drinking 
water cooler that is not lead-free and required that: 

• the EPA identify each brand and model of drinking water cooler, indicating which are lead free and which 
have a lead-lined tank and distribute the list to states (SDWA Sec. 1463), 

• the Consumer Product Safety Commission order that manufacturers and importers of all drinking water 
coolers identified as having a lead-lined tank repair, replace, or recall and provide a refund for such coolers 
(SDWA Sec. 1462), 

• the EPA publish a guidance document and testing protocol to assist states in determining the source and 
degree of lead contamination in school drinking water (SDWA Sec. 1464), and 

• states establish programs to assist schools and child care facilities to test for and remedy lead contamination 
problems, with public availability of results of such testing (SDWA Sec. 1464(d)). 

As a result of a 1996 court decision, States are not required to establish testing programs. In its decision, the 
Fifth Circuit held that provisions in section 1464(d) were unconstitutional under the Tenth Amendment to the 
U.S. Constitution because they directly compelled the state to enact and enforce a federal regulatory program 
and provided no options for the State to decline the program. The decision did not, however, restrict states 
from developing and carrying out their own programs to assist schools. 

In 1989 and subsequent years, EPA released guidance and information to inform states and school systems 
how to test for and reduce the risk of lead exposure in school drinking water. EPA’s guidance provides a 
protocol for testing water in schools and recommends that schools take action at fixtures where the lead 
concentration exceeds 20 ppb. This concentration differs from the 15 ppb action level that public water 
systems are required to follow The 20 ppb action level is based on a smaller sample collection volume of 
250 milliliters (ml) and is designed to pinpoint specific fountains and outlets that require attention. 

In 1990, Michigan did provide schools and licensed child care centers with information to assist in testing and 
remedying potential lead contamination of their drinking water as required by the Lead Contamination Control 
Act of 1988. This information included a sampling protocol and guidance on flushing their system to minimize 
lead exposure. 

In 2004, EPA surveyed states to determine what additional programs may exist to control exposure to lead in 
drinking water at schools and child care centers. Forty-nine states, Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia and 
the Navajo Nation responded. Only 16 respondents indicated they have or will conduct special sampling or 
studies to target lead exposure at schools and child care centers. Michigan has not included any additional 
sampling programs or studies. Flowever, some local agencies have conducted voluntary programs. For 
example, the W.K, Kellogg Foundation funded a program implemented by the Calhoun County Health 
Department that sampled schools in Battle Creek. In Michigan’s response to this EPA survey, we included a 
recommendation for EPA to allow schools to be considered as a primary LCR monitoring site so that more 
information about lead levels in schools would become available. However, no changes in sampling criteria 
have occurred to date. 



In 2005, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the EPA, the Department of Education, the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the American Waterworks Association, the Association of 
Metropolitan Water Agencies, the Association of State Drinking Water Administrators, the National Association 
of Water Companies and the National Rural Water Association to facilitate actions that reduce children’s 
exposure to lead from drinking water at schools and child care facilities. 

Across the country and in Michigan, most schools and child care facilities receive water from other community 
water systems. However, those schools that have their own source of drinking water are considered non- 
transient non-community water systems and are subject to the LCR. In Michigan, there are 755 such schools 
and child care centers that must monitor for lead to demonstrate compliance. 



Response to Corrosion Control Questions 


- Lime Softening can affect the pH in water 

- The pH of the water is one physical characteristic that can affect the leaching of lead from pipes into 
the water 

- As per the requirements in the Lead/Copper rule the Flint Water system was evaluated for two 
consecutive monitoring periods and the results of the monitoring demonstrated that further action was 
necessary. 

- The DEQ promptly notified the Flint water system of the need for additional measures and the city of 
Flint promptly began putting together an action plan to address this need. 



From: 

Sent: 

Subject: 


Sygo, Jim (DEQ) <SygoJ@michigan.gov> 
Wednesday, October 07, 2015 6:00 PM 
Fwd: TAC Meeting Highlights 


Summary of advisory committee meeting 
Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Prysby, Mike (DEQ)" <PRYSBY M@ rnichig a n.g o v> 

Date: October 7, 2015 at 4:56:44 PM EDT 
To: "Sygo, Jim (DEQ)" < Sv goi @.michi gan.gov > 

Subject: TAC Meeting Highlights 

Below is a summary of the Flint TAC meeting to obtain the committee's endorsement to switch 
back to Detroit water. 

1. The TAC endorses the switch back to the DWSD 

2. Marc Edwards of VA Tech supports the switchover to DWSD with conclusion that Flint River 
water with corrosion control will still be 4 times more corrosive 

than water from DWSD after 5 weeks of treatment. 

3. Genesee County states two weeks to prepare pipeline for re-use (flush, disinfect, sample, etc) 

4. Supplemental corrosion control still needed with DWSD water and ACT 399 submittal can be 
made in approx one week. 

5. No pros were brought to the table for staying on the Flint River. 

Sent from my iPhone 


l 



City of Flint, Michigan 

Third Floor, City Hall 
1101 S. Saginaw Street 
Flint, Michigan 48502 
www. cityofflint. com 



Meeting Minutes - Draft 

Monday, March 25, 2013 
5:33 PM 

Agenda amended to include Board of Hospital Managers appointments 

Council Chambers 

CITY COUNCIL 

Scott Kincaid, President, Ward 9 
Bryant W. Nolden, Vice President, Ward 3 

Claudia Croom, Ward 1 Jacqueline Poplar, Ward 2 

Joshua M. Freeman, Ward 4 Bernard Lawler, Ward 5 

Sheldon A. Neeley, Ward 6 Dale K. Weigh ill, Ward 7 

Michael J. Sarginson, Ward 8 


Inez M. Brown, City Clerk 




CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


CALL TO ORDER 

President Scott Kincaid called the meeting to order at 5:33 p.m. 

ROLL CALL 

Councilperson Michael Sarginson arrived at 5:37 p.m. 

Present: Councilperson: Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson 

Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
Kincaid, Councilperson Weighill and Councilperson Croom 

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE 

Councilperson Sheldon Neeley led the Pledge of Allegiance. 

SPECIAL ORDER 

130217 Special Order/Information & Discussion/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) 

A Special Order as requested by Council President Scott Kincaid to continue 
discussion and review of information on the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA). 


Presented 

PETITIONS AND UNOFFICIAL COMMUNICATIONS 

130193 Change to Digital/All Limited Basic Service Channels/Comcast Cablevision 

Communication dated March 6, 2013, from Gerald W. Smith, Government Affairs 
Manager, Comcast, to Flint City Clerk, re: On or shortly after April 9, 2013, Comcast 
will convert all Limited Basic service channels -- including Public, Government and 
Educational Access (PEG) channels to digital format, and will provide customers 
with digital equipment. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

130199 Certified Letter/Loyst Fletcher, Jr. & Associates 

Communication received from Loyst Fletcher, Jr. to Chief Legal Officer, re: He 
questions the tax-exempt status of Word of Life Christian Church, which received a 
tax bill from the city. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

130200 Local Approval Notice/Michigan Liquor Control Commission (MLCC)/Time 

Square/Ward 3 

Local Approval Notice dated March 14, 2013, from MLCC to Flint City Clerk, re: The 
MLCC has received a request to transfer all stock in 2012 Class C license with 
Sunday Sales Permit (PM) and Dance Permit, located at 4522 N. Saginaw, 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 1 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


Flint, Michigan, 48505, Genesee County, held by the estate of Myra Seals, Inc., 
1028 Cora Dr., Flint, Ml 48532, to Carisa Mays Bishop, Personal Representative. 
[NOTE: Approval order enclosed.] 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130202 Local Approval Notice/Michigan Liquor Control Commission (MLCC)/D & R Market, 

Inc./Ward 6 

Local Approval Notice dated March 6, 2013, and received March 15, 2013, from 
MLCC to Flint City Clerk, re: The MLCC has received an application from 2 AAR, 
LLC, requesting to Transfer Ownership of a Specially Designated Distributor (SDD) 
and Specially Designated Merchant (SDM) licensed business with Sunday Sales 
permit (PM) and Direct Connection-1 to D & R Market, Inc., located at 1402-1404 N. 
Chevrolet, Flint, Michigan, 48504, Genesee County, from 2 AAR, LLC, 3079 
Shattuck Arms Blvd., Apt. 5, Saginaw, Ml 48603. [NOTE: The application was 
cancelled pursuant to a request from an attorney.] 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130204 Changes/Cable Channel Lineup/Comcast Cablevision 

Communication dated March 18, 2013, from Gerald W. Smith, Government Affairs 
Manager, Comcast, to Flint City Clerk, re: effective on or about May 22, 2013, Fox 
Business Network/Fox Business Network HD (ch. 06/243) will from the Digital 
Preferred Service to the Digital Starter Service. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130205 Media Alert/Flint Public Art Project/Announcement of Design Winner 

Media Alert received via e-mail on March 19, 2013, from the American Institute of 
Architects (AIA), re: The Flint Public Art Project and the Flint Chapter of the AIA will 
announce the winner of the $25,000.00 grand prize in the inaugural Flat Lot 
competition to design and build a temporary summer pavilion on Flint's central 
downtown parking lot at 9:30 a.m. Thursday, March 21, 2013, at the John Gazall & 
Associates, Mott Building, 503 S. Saginaw Street, Flint. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130207 Damage Claims 

MAYFIELD, LINDA, 2518 Walter Street, Flint, Ml (WARD 2) 

LANE, WILLIE C., 3130 Concord Street, Flint, Ml (WARD 6) 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

COMMUNICATIONS FROM CITY OFFICIALS 

130194 Press Release/City of Flint/Hiring of New Police Officers/Recruitment of Others 

Press Release dated March 11, 2013, from Jason Lorenz, City of Flint Public 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 2 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130195 


130196 


130201 


130203 


Information Officer, re: The City of Flint has seven new police officers on the job 
from the public safety millage passed last November by voters. The city's next step 
is to hold a recruitment drive by working with a local college, which will set up a 
Police Academy when the city has gathered sufficient interest from its efforts. 


This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


Press Release/City of Flint/Sunday Sales of Alcohol Before Noon Not Permitted on 
St. Patrick's Day 

Press Release dated March 12, 2013, from Jason Lorenz, City of Flint Public 
Information Officer, re: The City of Flint will not be able to permit Sunday alcohol 
sales before noon this Sunday, March 17, St. Patrick's Day. While the city adopted 
a resolution to allow a one-time exception to the Sunday morning alcohol ban, the 
Michigan Liquor Control Commission has taken the position that the city cannot 
create a one-day exemption. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


Flint City Council/Public Notice/Special City Council Meeting/March 18, 2013 

Public Notice posted March 14, 2013, re: The Flint City Council will hold a Special 
City Council Meeting, followed by a Finance Committee Meeting, at 5:30 p.m. 
Monday, March 18, 2013, in the City Council Chambers, 3rd Floor, City Hall, to 
consider a contract with the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA). 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

Emergency Financial Manager (EFM) Order #1 0/Grant Applications 

Order #10 issued by Emergency Financial Manager on March 15, 2013, "Grant 
Applications," re: "all city officials, department heads, division heads and employees 
shall adhere to ...requirements regarding the approval of any and all grant 
applications on behalf of the City of Flint or grant applications submitted by others 
which in any way involves the financial, programmatic or personnel support by the 
City of Flint." The five requirements, including the stipulation that only the 
Emergency Financial Manager or City Administrator are authorized to accept grants 
on behalf of the city, are included in the order. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


Press Release/City of Flint/Flint Lifelines/Meeting Announcement 

Press Release dated March 16, 2013, from Jason Lorenz, City of Flint Public 
Information Officer, re: Flint Lifelines, formerly CeaseFire Flint, will hold community 
meetings on the fourth Thursday of each month, beginning at 1 p.m. Thursday, 
March 28, 2013 at Flint Northwestern High School. The meetings are open to the 
public. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 3 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130206 Flint City Council/Public Notice/Finance Committee Meeting/March 20, 201 3 

Public Notice posted March 19, 2013, re: The Flint City Council will hold a Finance 
Committee Meeting at 5:30 p.m. Wednesday, March 20, 2013, in the City Council 
Committee Room, 3rd Floor, City Hall. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130208 Flint City Council/Public Notice/Special Affairs Committee Meeting/March 25, 2013 

Public Notice posted March 22, 2013, re: The Flint City Council will hold a Special 
Affairs Committee Meeting at 5 p.m. Monday, March 25, 2013, in the City Council 
Committee Room, 3rd Floor, City Hall. A regular City Council meeting will 
immediately follow in the Council Chambers. 

This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 


130209 Traffic Engineering/Note for Bulletin/Street-Sidewalk-Lane Closures 

Notes for Bulletin (3) dated February/March 2013, for street, sidewalk, or lane 
closures, re: (1) Harrison Street, Saginaw Street and Second Avenue (cable 
failure-March 11-March 20); (2) First Street, Harrison Street, Wallenberg, Kearsley, 
Crapo, Horrigan, and Harrison (St. Patrick's Day Pot O' Gold 4-Mil Run/Walk-March 
17); and (3) Chevrolet Avenue (University Corner Grand Opening-March 22). 


This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 

Passed The Consent Agenda 

A motion was made. The motion carried. 

PUBLIC SPEAKERS 
ROLL CALL 

Councilperson Dale Weighill left at approximately 1 p.m. 

Present: Councilperson: Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson 

Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: Councilperson: Councilperson Weighill 


APPOINTMENTS 

130169.1 Amendment/Reappointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/Christine Monk (Ward 6) 

Amended resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the 
reappointment of Christine Monk (821 Frank Street, Flint Ml 48504 - Ward 6), to 
the Zoning Board of Appeals for a three-year term, commencing September 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 4 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130211 


130212 


130213 


1 , 201 1 , and expiring September 1 , 2014. [By way of background, Ms. Monk's term 
on the Zoning Board of Appeals expired in September 201 1 , but she has continued 
since that time to serve.] [Resolution amended to fix typographical error in first 
paragraph of resolution from "Board of Review" to "Zoning Board of Appeals."] 


Sponsors: Sheldon A. Neeley 

A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Appointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/Chris Zuwala (Ward 4) 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the appointment of 
Chris Zuwala (3510 Whittier Avenue, Flint Ml 48506 - Ward 4) to the Zoning Board 
of Appeals for a three-year term, expiring September 1, 2013. [NOTE: By way of 
background, Gloria Kelly's term as the 4th Ward representative expired in 
September 2007, but she continued to serve until resigning in January 2013.] 


Sponsors: Joshua M. Freeman 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Councilperson Poplar, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Reappointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/Birdie V. Brooks (Ward 5) 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the reappointment of 
Birdie V. Brooks (1307 Columbia Lane, Flint Ml 48503 - Ward 5), to the Zoning 
Board of Appeals for the remainder of a three-year term, expiring September 1 , 
2014. [Byway of background, Ms. Brook's term on the Zoning Board of Appeals 
expired in September 201 1 , but she has continued since that time to serve.] 


Sponsors: Bernard Lawler 

A motion was made by Councilperson Lawler, seconded by Councilperson Neeley, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 5 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130214 


130215 


Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the reappointment of 
Marcia Braden (984 Barney Avenue, Flint Ml 48503 - Ward 8), to the Zoning 
Board of Appeals for the remainder of a three-year term, expiring September 1 , 
2014. [By way of background, Ms. Braden's term on the Zoning Board of Appeals 
expired in September 201 1 , but she has continued since that time to serve.] 


Sponsors: Michael J. Sarginson 

A motion was made by Councilperson Sarginson, seconded by Councilperson 
Freeman, that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Reappointment/Zoning Board of Appeals/David C. Veasley (Ward 9) 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the reappointment of 
David C. Veasley (261 8 Pinetree Drive, Flint Ml 48507 - Ward 9), to the Zoning 
Board of Appeals for the remainder of a three-year term, expiring September 1 , 
2015. [Byway of background, Mr. Veasley's term on the Zoning Board of Appeals 
expired in September 2009, but he has continued since that time to serve ] 


Sponsors: Scott Kincaid 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Appointment/Genesee County Land Bank Citizens' Advisory Council/Anthony 
Tucker (Ward 4) 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council recommends the appointment of 
Anthony Tucker (2960 Henry Street, Flint Ml 48506 - Ward 4) to the Genesee 
County Land Bank Citizens' Advisory Council for the remainder of a three-year 
term, expiring in January 2016. [NOTE: By way of background, Dan Anderson's 
term as the 4th Ward representative expired in January 2013.] 

Sponsors: Joshua M. Freeman 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Councilperson Poplar, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 6 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130218 


130219 


130220 


Reappointment/Hurley Board of Hospital Managers/Philip W. Shaltz 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council approves the reappointment of Philip 
W. Shaltz (14144 Moffet Drive, Fenton, Ml 48430) to an additional five-year term on 
the (Hurley) Board of Hospital Managers, with such term to commence May 1, 

2013, and expire April 30, 2018. 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Appointment/Hurley Board of Hospital Managers/Delrico Loyd 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council approves the appointment of Delrico 
Loyd (2641 Westwood Parkway, Flint, Ml 48507) to a five-year term on the (Hurley) 
Board of Hospital Managers, with such term to commence May 1, 2013, and expire 
April 30, 2018. [By way of background, Carl E. Mason was appointed in June 2008; 
his term expires April 30, 2013.] 

Approved 

Substituted 

A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Lawler, 
that this matter be POSTPONED for March 27, 2013. The motion failed by the 
following vote: 

Aye: 3 - Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley and Councilperson Sarginson 

No: 5 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Substituted 

A motion was made by Vice President Nolden, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, 
that this matter be Approved. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 5 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

No: 3 - Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley and Councilperson Sarginson 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Appointment/Hurley Board of Hospital Managers/Donna Poplar 

Resolution resolving that the Flint City Council approves the appointment of Donna 
Poplar (5277 Kimberly Woods Circle, Flint, Ml 48504) to a five-year term 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 7 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


on the (Hurley) Board of Hospital Managers, with such term to commence May 1, 
2013, and expire April 30, 2018. [Byway of background, Frances Gilcreastwas 
appointed in August 2008; her term expires April 30, 2013.] 

Approved 

Substituted 

A motion was made by Councilperson Lawler, seconded by Councilperson Neeley, 
that this matter be POSTPONED for March 26, 2013. The motion carried by the 
following vote: 

Aye: 7 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Lawler, 

Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and 
Councilperson Croom 

No: 1 - Councilperson Freeman 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

RESOLUTIONS 

130165.1 Amended Resolution/Contract/City of Flint/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) 

Amended resolution resolving that city officials are authorized to enter into a 
contract with Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) to purchase fifteen (15) units of 
capacity, AND, resolving that the City Administrator is authorized to provide KWA 
information needed to administer the contract, and, with approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. [NOTE: For 
each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer shall pay to the KWA a 
one-time fee of $32,300. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the KWA not less than 
$32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated 
amount NOT-TO-EXCEED $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the 
bonds are paid in full. If it is determined that the costs per unit will exceed 
$355,300.00, the buyer has a right to cancel the contract. Over the next 25 years, it 
is expected that continuing with Detroit will cost the region $2.1 billion, compared to 
$1.9 billion with a pipeline.] [NOTE: Contract not included.] [NOTE: Resolution 
amended from 18 to 15 units of capacity.] 


A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, 
that this matter be Amended. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 5 - Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, 

Councilperson Neeley and Councilperson Sarginson 

No: 3 - Councilperson Poplar, President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

130165.2 Amended Resolution/Contract/City of Flint/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) 

Amended resolution resolving that city officials are authorized to enter into a 
contract with Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) to purchase sixteen (16) units 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 8 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


130216 


130216.1 


of capacity, AND, resolving that the City Administrator is authorized to provide KWA 
information needed to administer the contract, and, with approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. [NOTE: For 
each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer shall pay to the KWA a 
one-time fee of $32,300. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the KWA not less than 
$32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated 
amount NOT-TO-EXCEED $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the 
bonds are paid in full. If it is determined that the costs per unit will exceed 
$355,300.00, the buyer has a right to cancel the contract. Over the next 25 years, it 
is expected that continuing with Detroit will cost the region $2.1 billion, compared to 
$1.9 billion with a pipeline.] [NOTE: Contract not included.] [NOTE: Resolution 
amended from 15 to 16 units of capacity.] 


A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, 
that this matter be Adopted. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 7 - Councilperson Poplar, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, 

Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and 
Councilperson Croom 

No: 1 - Vice President Nolden 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Approval/The First Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the Downtown 
Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint 

Resolution that the City of Flint hereby approves and The First Amendment & 
Restated Rules Governing the Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the 
City of Flint, attached hereto. [NOTE: The City of Flint created the DDA, in 
accordance with Public Act 1 97 of 1 975, as amended, and approved The Rules 
Governing the DDA in 1977. Public Act 197 has been amended and revised at 
various times since then, which required the proposed changes.] [NOTE: The First 
Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the Downtown Development Authority 
(DDA) of the City of Flint is attached.] 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, 
that this matter be Amended. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

Amended Resolution/Approval/The First Amendment & Restated Rules Governing 
the Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint 

Amended resolution that the City of Flint hereby approves and The First 
Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the Downtown Development Authority 
(DDA) of the City of Flint, attached hereto. [NOTE: The City of Flint created the 
DDA, in accordance with Public Act 197 of 1975, as amended, and approved The 
Rules Governing the DDA in 1977. Public Act 197 has been 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 9 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


amended and revised at various times since then, which required the proposed 
changes.] [NOTE: The First Amendment & Restated Rules Governing the 
Downtown Development Authority (DDA) of the City of Flint is attached.] 

[Resolution amended for changes to rules.] 

A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Vice President Nolden, 
that this matter be Adopted. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

RESOLUTIONS - MAY BE REFERRED FROM S.A. 

130210 Resolution/City Council/Mayor Dayne Walling/Request for Appointment of 

Transition Advisory Board 

Resolution resolving that Mayor Dayne Walling and the Flint City Council request 
and recommend to Gov. Rick Snyder that a receivership transition advisory board 
be appointed for the City of Flint under Public Act 436 no later than July 1 , 201 3. 
[NOTE: On December 1, 2011, Gov. Snyder appointed Michael K. Brown as 
Emergency Manager under Public Act 4 for the City of Flint, due in part to a 
consistent deficit in the general fund, the decline in pooled cash, budget issues and 
unfunded liabilities for post-employment benefits. Due to the suspension and 
subsequent repeal of Public Act 4, Gov. Snyder appointed Edward J. Kurtz as 
Emergency Financial Manager under Public Act 72 for the City of Flint, effective 
August 9, 2012. Both the Emergency Manager and the subsequently appointed 
Emergency Financial Manager were authorized by virtue of their appointment to 
“act for and in the place and stead of the governing body and the office of chief 
administrative officer of the City of Flint.” On March 28, 2013, Public Act 436 will 
become effective and provides that an emergency financial manager appointed and 
serving under state law immediately prior to the effective date shall continue to 
serve as an emergency manager under Public Act 436. As an alternative to 
continuation of an emergency manager, and if the financial emergency has been 
rectified, Public Act 436 authorizes the governor to appoint a receivership transition 
advisory board, which serves at the pleasure of the governor and monitors the 
affairs of the local government until the receivership is terminated.] 


No vote was taken on this amendment. 

Amended 


130210.1 Amended Resolution/City Council/Mayor Dayne Walling/Request for Appointment 
of Transition Advisory Board 

Amended resolution resolving that Mayor Dayne Walling and the Flint City Council 
request and recommend to Gov. Rick Snyder that a receivership transition advisory 
board be appointed for the City of Flint under Public Act 436 no later than July 1 , 
2013. [NOTE: On December 1 , 201 1 , Gov. Snyder appointed Michael K. Brown as 
Emergency Manager under Public Act 4 for the 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 10 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


City of Flint, due in part to a consistent deficit in the general fund, the decline in 
pooled cash, budget issues and unfunded liabilities for post-employment benefits. 
Due to the suspension and subsequent repeal of Public Act 4, Gov. Snyder 
appointed Edward J. Kurtz as Emergency Financial Manager under Public Act 72 
for the City of Flint, effective August 9, 201 2. Both the Emergency Manager and 
the subsequently appointed Emergency Financial Manager were authorized by 
virtue of their appointment to “act for and in the place and stead of the governing 
body and the office of chief administrative officer of the City of Flint.” On March 28, 
2013, Public Act 436 will become effective and provides that an emergency 
financial manager appointed and serving under state law immediately prior to the 
effective date shall continue to serve as an emergency manager under Public Act 
436. As an alternative to continuation of an emergency manager, and if the financial 
emergency has been rectified, Public Act 436 authorizes the governor to appoint a 
receivership transition advisory board, which serves at the pleasure of the governor 
and monitors the affairs of the local government until the receivership is 
terminated.] [Six-page resolution amended for changes proposed by City Council, 
City Clerk and Mayor Dayne Walling.] 


A motion was made by Councilperson Freeman, seconded by Councilperson Poplar, 
that this matter be Adopted. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 8 - Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, 

Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

MEETING SCHEDULE 
ADDITIONAL COUNCIL DISCUSSION 
ADJOURNMENT 

Having no further business, Council President Scott Kincaid adjourned the meeting at 8:59 
p.m. 

Respectfully transcribed and submitted, 

Janell Johnson. Administrative Secretary to Citv Council 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 11 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





BY THE EMERGENCY MANAGER: 


EM SUBMISSION NO. : SLQt3£MQ <// 
PRESENTED ! 3 1 3 

ADOPTED: 




RESOLUTION TO PURCHASE CAPACITY FROM 
KAREGNONDI WATER AUTHORITY 


The Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) is a governmental consortium of cities and 
counties in southeastern Michigan that was created to build a water pipeline that will provide 
water from Lake Huron to interested communities in Sanilac, Lapeer, and Genesee counties. 
The incorporating bodies that created the KWA are Sanilac County, Lapeer County, Genesee 
County, the City of Flint, and the City of Lapeer. 

The City of Flint is currently in a year to year contract with the City of Detroit for the 
purchase of water. A study was conducted that projected that staying with Detroit will cost the 
region $2.1 billion over the next 25 years. In contrast, if the region builds its own pipeline, the 
projected costs are $1.9 billion over the same period. After the initial 25 year period, the 
projected costs would be less then 25% of the projected water costs from Detroit. 

In order to build the pipeline, the KWA needs commitment from its members regarding 
the capacity that each member will purchase in the pipeline. The KWA is allowed to withdraw 
85 million gallons of water per day. Capacity is available to members in increments of 1 million 
gallons per day known as units. For each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer 
shall pay to the KWA a one time fee of $32,300.00. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the 
KWA not less then $32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated amount not 
to exceed $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the bonds are paid in full. If it is 
determined that the costs per unit will exceed $355,300.00 the buyer has a right to cancel the 
contract. 

The purchase of capacity along with the payment of other costs necessary to operate the 
pipeline gives the member a right to water for sale to its customers. The buyer has a right to 
resell capacity and water rights. Each party entering into a capacity contract shall also be 
entitled to appoint additional board members equal to the party’s percentage share of the total 
capacity under contract. 

It is in the long term best interests of the City of Flint to enter into a contract with the 
KWA to purchase up to eighteen (1 8) units of capacity. 



IT IS RESOLVED that City officials are authorized to enter into a contract with KWA 
to purchase up to eighteen ( 18 ) units of capacity. 

IT IS FURTHER RESOLVED that the City Administrator is authorized to provide 
KWA information needed to administer the contract and, vvitli approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. 



ENACT \/ FAIL 



Edward L. Kurtz, Enter 


APPROVED AS TO FINANCE: 



^^-Gerald Ambrose, Finance Director 


dated 


SAP. Bnde\E|Vf20 ! 3\Resolutio»s\KWA.03.28. 1 3.doc 


Flint City Council approves resolution to buy water from Karegnondi, state approval still ... Page 1 of 2 


Flint 


Flint City Council approves resolution to buy water 
from Karegnondi, state approval still needed 


J ) [httpiffconnacl.mllve.comistaff/dadamsl/lndex.html] By Dominic Adams | dadams5@mllvo.com thltp://conncct.mllv».com/staffWadams1/posts.htmlJ 
/ Follow on Twitter [http:tfwww.twltter.com/doniln1cadams] 

%i ' on March 25. 2013 at 10:45 PM, updated March 26, 2013 at 1:23 AM 

FLINT, MI - Flint is one step closer to getting its water from Lake Huron as part of the Karegnondi Water Authority. 

The vote, approved 7-1 at tire Flint City Council meeting Monday, March 25 

[http://w%vTv.mlive,com/ne\vs/flint/index,ssf/20i3/o3/flint_citj r _council_again_delay.litml] , may have set in motion the 
end to Flint paying to get its water from Detroit. 

Under the proposal, Flint would get 16 million gallons per day of raw water from Lake Huron, pipe it to Flint for treatment and then sell it 
to customers throughout the city. Another 2 million gallons per day would come from the Flint River and wilt be treated in Flint, 

Mayor Dayne Walling said the Department of Environmental Quality must approve Flint’s getting 2 million gallons per day from the Flint 
River. 

Tuesday’s meeting followed weeks of discussions and special meetings surrounding the resolution. 

“We got there,” Councilman Joshua Freeman said. “That’s the important thing.” 

There were more than 50 people at Monday’s meeting. 

“Going with Karegnondi is the best decision. We have no opinion on the economics of the decision,” said Rebecca Fedewa, Flint River 
Watershed Coalition executive director. “If we start drawing water out of the Fiint River, we are at risk of having to start releasing w'ater 
from our reservoirs.” 

Genesee County Drain Commissioner Jeff Wright said the decision must still be approved by a count}' water and waste advisory board. The 
KWA board will then be reconvened for final approval. 

Wright said construction could start in May. 

State treasuiy officials still must approve the city council's move because Flint has an emergency financial manager. All expenditures over 
$50,000 must be approved. 

Genesee County Drain Commissioner Jeff Wright has said that Flint would pay roughly $6.4 million annually for water service if it joined 
the pipeline - a nearly $4 million savings on what it pays Detroit for water. 

Walling previously said the city would save $19 million over eight years 

[http://www.nilive.coin/news/fllnt/index, ssf/20i3/o3/flint_city_council_delays_deci.html] by getting water from the 
KWA. 

"It’s a historic night in the City of Flint,” Walling said. “The savings will be less with the capacity level approved by city council because 
there will be increased treatment cost for the river water.” 

He said the DEQ told the city it needed to get 18 million gallons per day or there would have to be additional work done at Flint’s water 
plant. 

Flint’s water plant and the Flint River is currently the backup for Flint and Genesee County, however, the plant only operates four times 
per year. 

Councilman Bryant Nolden was the lone dissenting vote. 


http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2013/03/flint_city_council_approves_re.html 


10/7/2015 



Flint City Council approves resolution to buy water from Karegnondi, state approval still ... Page 2 of 2 


“It was a protest vote,” Nolden said. “I knew they had enough votes. I just feel like the Flint River is our best option.” 

Karengnondi is the regional water authority that includes Genesee, Lapeer and Sanilac counties and the cities of Flint and Lapeer. 

Flint is the second municipality, behind Genesee County, to officially decide to purchase raw water through the KWA. Lapeer city officials 
said they intend to purchase water, but an agreement has been finalized. 

Dominic Adams is a reporter for MLive-FIint Journal. Contact him at dadams5@mlive.c0m or 810-241-8803. Follow him on 
Twitter [http://ioww.twitter.com/domimcadamsj , Facebook [httji://ivwiv Jacebook.com/dominic.adams.1865] or 
Google+ [https;/ /plus. google.com/1036906725068087299119rel-author] . 

IS 


Related Stories 


Price of Detroit water for Flint is $1 .5 
million a month, mayor says 


lhUp://www.mlive.corn/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/10/mayor_city_ad 




Here’s how that toxic lead gets into Flint 
water 


(http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/10/see_step_by_; 


Registration on or use of this silo constitutes acceptance of our User Ag reement and Privacy Policy 
© 2015 Mltve Media Group All rights reserved (About Us). 

The materia! on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Mltve 
Media Group 

Community Rules appty to all content you upload or othervrise submit to this site. Contact interactivity management. 

Ad Choices 


http://v\ r ww.mlive.coni/news/flint/index,ssf/2013/03/flint_city_council_approves_re,htnil 


10/7/2015 




$ ~GOUNTY | 

GENESEE COUNTY DRAIN COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE 

GENESEE COUNTY 

I fcjfcjlreia | 

JEFFREY WRIGHT 

mmm 

iDRAfN COMMJ6 SJONBr| 

COMMISSIONER 

OFtAfN COMMISSfONER 


G-4608 BEECHER ROAD, FLINT, Ml 48532 
PHONE (810) 732-1590 FAX (810) 732-1474 


FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE CONTACT: Jeff Wright 

March 26, 2013 810-287-1925 


What: Jeff Wright Statement on Flint City Council Approving Resolution to Join KWA. 
When: March 26, 2013 


Additional Info: Jeff Wright, CEO of the KWA, today praised the Flint City Council for voting to approve 
a resolution to officially have the City of Flint join the KWA and its' water line, 

"I have said from the beginning that this decision must be made by Flint's City Council and Mayor," said 
Wright. "I appreciate the council voting the way they did, but even more than that, I am glad the 
residents of Flint were able to have their voices heard via their elected officials." The next step in the 
process will come with the KWA Board executing the contract for the City. 

"The most important aspect from the vote is the fact that we as an Authority can move forward 
knowing Flint's intentions," said Wright. 

Despite Emergency Manager Ed Kurtz publicly supporting the project, Wright had made a vote by 
council a condition of Flint joining the KWA so the residents would have their say. 

"There is a basic tenet that government is best when it has local control. We saw that with the council 
vote. Nobody, whether they live in Flint, Grand Blanc, Davison, Fenton, or anywhere in Genesee County, 
should have these types of decisions made by people who live outside of their community," said Wright. 

At the next Water and Waste Advisory Board meeting a vote will be taken to award a contract for 
construction of the intake portion of the water line. All bids were submitted to the board at their last 
meeting for review. 




RtCK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 


State of Michigan 
DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY 
Lansing 


ANDY DILLON 
STATE TREASURER 


Mr. Edward Kurtz April 11,2013 

Emergency Manager 
City of Flint 

1 101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 

Dear Mr. Kurtz: 

Thank you for your March 29, 2013 letter, which is attached for reference. As the Emergency 
Manager for the City of Flint (“Flint” or “City”), you have asked for my concurrence, pursuant to 
Public Act 436 of 2012, the Local Financial Stability and Choice Act, to authorize a contract in 
excess of $50,000.00 not subject to competitive bidding. This request was related to the City 
entering into an agreement with the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) for provision of raw 
water for the City. 

In considering your request, I took note of the following facts in support of Flint joining KWA. 
First, there is widespread support in the City for this move, including the support of the Mayor, 
the City Council, and the Emergency Manager. Second, this move will provide a unique 
opportunity for the City and County to partner on an important project, which will hopefully lead 
to future regional collaboration. Third, the Department of Environmental Quality is supportive of 
the City participating in the KWA project. Finally, your representations that this deal will lead to 
substantial savings for the City over the coming decades, savings that are desperately needed to 
help with the turnaround of the City of Flint. 

It is my understanding that the Detroit Water and Sewer Department is making a final best offer 
to Genesee County and the City of Flint next Monday, April 1 5, 2013. As such, this approval 
will be effective at 5 pm on April 16, 2013 after receiving written notice from the City that either 
no such offer was presented to the county and the City or that an offer was received and was 
rejected in good faith based upon specified objections. 

For the reasons described above and subject to the conditions set forth herein, pursuant to 
Section 12 (3) of PA 436 of 2012, 1 am authorizing you to proceed with adopting the resolution 
and entering into a contract with KWA. 



P.O, SOX 30716 * LANSING, MICHIGAN 48909 
www.michlgan.gov/treasury> (517) 373-3200 



Flint council supports buying water from Lake Huron through KWA | MLive.com 


Page 1 of 1 


Flint 


Flint council supports buying water from Lake Huron 
through KWA 


gl [http://connect.mllYe.com/staffldadams1/lnd8X.htnil] By Dominic Adams | dadams5@mllvs.com [hltp://connect.mllve.com/staff/dadams1/posts.h(ml] 
•¥> Follow on Twitter [http://www.twltter.com/domlnlcadams] 
lv ‘ on Mart* 25, 2013 at 7:17 PM, updated March 26, 2013 at 7:43 AM 

FLINT, MI — Flint residents may soon get their water from Lake Huron. 


The Flint City Council voted 7-1 to get 16 million gallons per day from the Karegnondi Water Authority. 


"This is about compromise," said Councilman Sheldon Neeley. 


Neeley got support from Councilman Joshua Freeman, after the two were previously at odds about the amount the city should withdraw 
from Lake Huron. 

Councilman Bryant Nolden was the lone "no" vote. 


"It was a protest vote," Nolden said. "I just feel like the Flint River is our best option." 

Genesee County Drain Commissioner said construction of the pipeline could start in May. 

The city currently pays to get its water from Detroit. 

State treasury officials still must approve the city council's move because Flint has an emergency financial manager. All expenditures over 
$50,000 must be approved. 

Dominic Adams is a reporter for MLive-Flint Journal Contact him at dadams5@mlive.c07n or 810-341-8803. Follow him on 
Tiuitter [http://ioiow.tioitter.com/dominicadams] , Facebook [http://wwwJdcebook.com/dominic.adams.1865] or 
Google+ [https://plus.googie.com/10369067250680872991rtrefcauthov ] . 


Related Stories 



Enbridge can begin piping tar sands oil 
along Lake Ontario north shore 



Former Detroit American Motors Corp. 
headquarters being auctioned; starting bid 
$500 


[http://wvw.mlive.com/news/index.ssf/201 5/1 0/enbridge_can_beg 


[http://www,mlive,com/news/detroit/index.ssf/201 5/1 0/former_detn 


Registration on or use oF this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement and Privacy Policy 
©2015 MLtve Media Group A5! rights reserved (About Us), 

The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the priorwritten permission of MLive 
Media Group 

Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site. Contact Interactivity management. 

[> Ad Choices 


http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2013/03/flint_city_council_again_delay.htnil 


10/7/2015 




Resolution: 


130165.2 

Presented: 3 - 11-13 

Adopted: 3 - 25-13 


AMENDED RESOLUTION TO PURCHASE CAPACITY 
FROM KAREGNONDI WATER AUTHORITY 


BY THE MAYOR: 

The Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) is a governmental consortium of cities and 
counties in southeastern Michigan that was created to build a water pipeline that will provide 
water from Lake Huron to interested communities in Sanilac, Lapeer, and Genesee counties. 
The incorporating bodies that created the KWA are Sanilac County, Lapeer County, Genesee 
County, the City of Flint, and the City of Lapeer. 

The City of Flint is currently in a year to year contract with the City of Detroit for the 
purchase of water. A study was conducted that projected that staying with Detroit will cost the 
region $2.1 billion over the next 25 years. In contrast, if the region builds its own pipeline, the 
projected costs are $1.9 billion over the same period. After the initial 25 year period, the 
projected costs would be less then 25% of the projected water costs from Detroit. 

In order to build the pipeline, the KWA needs commitment from its members regarding 
the capacity that each member will purchase in the pipeline. The KWA is allowed to withdraw 
85 million gallons of water per day. Capacity is available to members in increments of 1 million 
gallons per day known as units. For each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer 
shall pay to the KWA a one time fee of $32,300.00. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the 
KWA not less then $32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated amount not 
to exceed $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the bonds are paid in full. If it is 
determined that the costs per unit will exceed $355,300.00 the buyer has a right to cancel the 
contract. 

The purchase of capacity along with the payment of other costs necessary to operate the 
pipeline gives the member a right to water for sale to its customers. The buyer has a right to 
resell capacity and water rights. Each party entering into a capacity contract shall also be 
entitled to appoint additional board members equal to the party’s percentage share of the total 
capacity under contract. 

The City of Flint has decided that it is in its long term best interests to enter into a 
contract with the KWA to purchase SIXTEEN (16) units of capacity, plus TWO (2) units from 
the Flint River. 



IT IS RESOLVED that City officials are authorized to enter into a contract with KWA 
to purchase SIXTEEN (16) units of capacity, plus TWO (2) units from the Flint River. 

IT IS FURTHER RESOLVED that the City Administrator is authorized to provide 
KWA information needed to administer the contract and, with approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. 


APPROVED AS TO FORM: 



APPROVED AS TO FINANCE: 


Gerald Ambrose 
Finance Director 


APPROVED BY MAYOR: 


Dayne Walling 
Mayor 


APPROVED BY CITY COUNCIL 
ON: March 25. 2013 

Inez Brown /J 
Clerk, City of Flint 


APPROVED BY 
CITY COUNCIL 

MAR 25 2013 

■•A :L>v 


S:\JP\Ordinances and Resos\KWA.03.08.13.doc 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Wednesday, October 07, 2015 7:57 PM 
Murray, David (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Fwd: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 


Sent from my iPhone 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Hollins, Harvey (GOV)" < LU' 0 LGbi 
Date: October 7, 2015 at 7:51:41 PM EDT 
To: "Baird, Richard (GOV)" <bajrdr^mjchj 

Cc: "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" <^enJ.®.mL?MEf?D.-E9.Y > / "Biehl, Laura (GOV)" < B j e h A ! : .07. f .RQ.Vr 5, / 
"Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" < muchmored@michigan.gov >, "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" 

< demente{Srnichlaan,aov > 

Subject: Re: URGENT review please — Draft Flint water release 

Thanks Rich. I'll send a list of players that I am aware of later. I have two observations re the release 
below. 

1 ) 


Gov. Rick Snyder: Move back to Detroit water provides best protection for public health in Flint 

UNTIL KWA IS ONLINE 

State, Mott Foundation and city form partnership to fund switch 


FLINT, Mich. - Flint families and children will be better protected by reconnecting with the Great Lakes 
Water Authority as the source of the city’ s drinking water UNTIL KWA IS ONLINE, Gov. Rick Snyder 
said. 


******* although KWA is referenced later, the opening implies that this is a permanent switch and that 
KWA will be substandard to GLWA******** 

2 ) 


"The move to Detroit water, which is drawn from Lake Huron, carries many public health 
benefits. As large bodies of water, the Great Lakes are naturally prone to fewer problems 
from large rain events and other runoff issues that can be present in shallower rivers. 
Additionally, the Great Lakes Water Authority has already frilly optimized its corrosion 
control, using phosphates to help coat the insides of pipes and prevent lead from leaching 
into the water. " 


l 



*****thi S is a good statement and true as long as all municipalities get there water from the Great Lakes. 
If not, are we saying that there are other communities that do not have optimum drinking water? ***** 

Best, 

Harvey 

On Oct 7, 2015, at 7:12 PM, Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@fT:ichigan.gov > wrote: 

I think this looks good but are we missing an opportunity to shout out all the entities 
that have stepped up to help? GM, Home Depot, etc. etc.? 

If Harvey has the full list, perhaps it could even be attached as an addendum. The point 
is that a lot of people did come together to address the problem, including the private 
sector and various volunteer organizations. I think it says something special about this 
state rallying to help one of its cities. 

Rich 

Sent from my iPad 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Biehl, Laura (GOV)" < 8iehlt@michigim.goy > 

Date: October 7, 2015 at 6:46:28 PM EDT 

To: "Murray, David (GOV)" < iVjUtTayDl@michigan.gov >, "Agen, Jarrod 
(GOV)" < AgenJ@michigan.ROv >, "Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" 

< Wurfeis@michjgan.gov >, "Heaton, Anna (GOV)" 

< Hea tonA@michigan.gov >, "Kennedy, Jordan (GOV)" 

< Kennedyj4@michigari.gov >, "Brown, Jessica (GOV)" 

< Brownj53@hr@higan.goy >, "Paciorek, Josh (GOV)" 

< Pacioreki@miehjgan.gov >, "Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS)" 

< I a s h e rg @ m j c h i ga n .go v > , "Minicuci, Angela (DHHS)" 

<MmksudA@rolchigan.goy>, "Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS)" 

<Elsnerj@rnlchigan.gov>, "Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" 

< W u rf e i s @ m i eh l ga n , gov>, "Tommasulo, Karen (DEQ)" 

<TomrnasuSoK@miehlgan.gov>, "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" 

<d e m e nte @ m i ch I ga n.gov>, "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 

< m uch m oreci @ m I ch iga n .gov>, "Posthumus, Dick (GOV)" 

<Posthumusd@michi gan . g ov>, "Baird, Richard (GOV)" 

<bajrdr@rnjc h i gan.go v>, "Calley, Brian (GOV)" 

"Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV)" 

<forstneroi @mich i g3 n. g ov> 

Subject: RE: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 


See new version attached. Small revisions made and placeholders added 
for Mayor and Mott Foundation Quotes. 


From: Murray, David (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 6:12 PM 

To: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@michigan.gov >; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

< Wurfeis@michlg3rs.gov >; Biehl, Laura (GOV) < SlehiL@rriichigan.gov >: 


2 


Heaton, Anna (GOV) < HeatonA(g>rriichiaan.gov >; Kennedy, Jordan (GOV) 
< Kermedyj4pmldiigan.gov >; Brown, Jessica (GOV) 
< Brownj53Pmichigan.gov >; Paciorek, Josh (GOV) 
< Fadoreki@michigan.goy >: Lasher, Geralyn (DHHS) 

< I a s h e r g P rn i ch iga n -gov > ; Minicuci, Angela (DHHS) 
< Min;cudApmichigan.gov >; Eisner, Jennifer (DHHS) 
< Eisnerjprriichiaan.gov >; Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wu rf ei s @ m i ch i ga n . go v > ; 
Tommasulo, Karen (DEQ) < TommasyloKPmichigan.gov >; Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV) < cleraenteProichigan.gov >; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

< mud": m ored (&■ m i ch iga n .gov > ; Posthumus, Dick (GOV) 

< Post h u m usd p m I ch iga n ,gov > ; Baird, Richard (GOV) 

< ba I rd r @ m I ch iga n .go v > ; Calley, Brian (GOV) 

Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV) < forsi:nernl@michigan.gov > 

Subject: URGENT review please -- Draft Flint water release 

Team, 

Please review this draft press release for the Thursday announcement in 
Flint. This incorporates some suggested edits to the strong draft from 
DEQ earlier today. 

Thank you very much. 

Gov. Rick Snyder: Move back to 
Detroit water provides best 
protection for public health in 

Flint 

State, Mott Foundation and city form 
partnership to fund switch 

FLINT, Mich. - Flint families and children will be better protected 
by reconnecting with the Great Lakes Water Authority as the 
source of the city’s drinking water, Gov. Rick Snyder said. 

Snyder said Thursday that he will request the state Legislature to 
provide a portion of the $12 million needed to reconnect with the 
authority, with the Flint city government providing $2 million and 
the Charles Stewart Mott Foundation donating $4 million. 

The Michigan Department of Health and Human Services and the 
Department of Environmental Quality today also committed an 
additional $3.5 million for water filters, free lead testing through 
the state laboratory for Flint water customers, and hiring additional 
staff to conduct health exposure monitoring for lead in drinking 
water. 

Flint city leaders requested the state’s help to fund the 
reconnection after a Wednesday meeting of Flint’s Technical 
Advisory Committee. Flint’s move to the Great Lakes Water 


3 


Authority is expected to cost about $1.3 million per month until the 
Karegnondi Water Authority is completed next summer. 

“All Flint residents need clean, safe drinking water,” Snyder said. 
“The technical experts helping the city on its water advisory all 
agree this move back to the Great Lakes Water Authority provides 
the best public health protection for children and families. This 
effort today is the result of people coming together to solve a 
problem. I appreciate Detroit’s willingness to reconnect with Flint, 
the Mott Foundation’s generous donation, and the dedication of all 
parties to come together to protect Flint families and children.” 

The move to Detroit water, which is drawn from Lake Huron, 
carries many public health benefits. As large bodies of water, the 
Great Lakes are naturally prone to fewer problems from large rain 
events and other runoff issues that can be present in shallower 
rivers. Additionally, the Great Lakes Water Authority has already 
fully optimized its corrosion control, using phosphates to help coat 
the insides of pipes and prevent lead from leaching into the water. 

However, reconnecting with the authority will not completely 
resolve the city’s problem with lead service lines or aging 
infrastructure. It will take time for pipes in Flint to become coated 
with the phosphate corrosion control. Additionally, some 
households in the city could experience lead in their drinking water 
until all lead pipes and plumbing are replaced. 

To best protect public health, Snyder said state and local 
authorities will continue to carry out steps outlined on Oct. 2 in a 
comprehensive action plan, including continued testing, the use of 
faucet filters and providing residents with accurate information 
about steps to eliminate lead in water. 

Free filters are available for current MDHHS clients at the 125 E. 
Union St. or 4809 Clio Road MDHHS office locations. 

For residents who are not currently enrolled in MDHHS assistance 
programs, free filters are available at the Genesee County 
Community Action Resource Department offices at 2727 
Lippincott and 601 North Saginaw in Flint. Staff will be at all four 
locations from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday, to 
distribute filters and assist residents who have questions about 
proper installation. 

At the Lippincott location only, extended hours will be offered this 
weekend, including until 7 p.m. on Thursday and Friday and from 
10 a.m. to 2 p.m. on Saturday. 

Other good practices for residents concerned about lead include 
turning on the cold water tap and running the water until it’s as 
cold as it will go. Additionally, only use cold water for cooking, 
drinking and especially mixing baby formula. 

School test results released; more investigation 
planned 


4 



The state today also released the first results from its lead 
screening program in schools and homes. Of 37 total samples 
taken at 13 buildings, four samples spread over three buildings 
exceeded the federal action level of 15 parts per billion. 

However, this sampling provides only an initial screen, and the 
state is committing to further testing water and inspecting 
plumbing at these schools. Until testing is complete, schools are 
advised to continue using bottled water and filtration as a 
precaution to protect children. 

In addition, free testing is still available for any other Flint school, 
including daycares and Head Starts. Free testing is also available 
for any Flint resident. 

Additional information, including more detailed lead screening 
results, is available at www.mi^ 

a a a 

IT till 

It II ft 


Dave Murray 

Deputy Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 
517-335-6397, office 



Twitter:@michigandmurray 


<151008 Flint water release_V2.docx> 


5 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Tuesday, October IB, 2015 4:14 PM 
Dickinson, Sarah (GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Scott, Allison (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Flint Timeline 

1st letter to blend.pdf; 2nd request to blend.pdf; KWAApproval.pdf; Kurtz KWA.pdf; 
DWSD Termination Ltr.pdf 


Importance: 


High 


Can we put into Gov's briefing tonight? 

Kurtz was EM at time of final decision/move to switch to KWA. Earley was EM at time of switch to Flint River water. 


Flint EM dates (financial emergency declared in December 2011) 

Mike Brown, apptd 12-1-11 (when fin emer declared under PA 4 of 2011) 

Ed Kurtz, apptd 8-8-12 (when PA4 was repealed in Aug 2012, Brown couldn't serve as EM, PA 72 back in 
effect) 

Mike Brown, apptd 7-4-13 (Kurtz retired; PA436 in effect) 

Darnell Earley, apptd 10-8-13 (Brown resigned) 

Gerald Ambrose, apptd 1-13-15 (Earley appointed DPS EM) 

Financial Emergency resolved, 4-29-15 (RTAB apptd) 

Other dates 

June 26, 2012 - Letter from EM Brown to DWSD seeking permission to blend river water with DWSD 
water (attached). 

Sept. 20, 2012 - Letter from EM Kurtz to DWSD requesting written permission to implement blending 
(attached). 

March 25, 2013 - The Flint City Council endorses joining KWA (see url below) 

http://blog.mlive.com/newsnow impact/print.html?entry=/2013/03/flint city council approves re.ht 
ml 

April 11, 2013 - Treasurer Dillion sends letter to EM Kurtz (attached) noting conditional approval of 
move to KWA (pursuant to PA436), pending a review of DWSD's last, best offer. 

April 16, 2013 - EM Kurtz informs Treasury that the City will join KWA (attached). 

April 17, 2013 - DWSD transmits letter to EM Kurtz terminating service to Flint, effective April 17, 2014 
(attached). 

April 17, 2014 - Water service from DWSD officially ends. 


l 



2 



hng 


Michael K, Brown 
Emergency Manager 


Howard D. Croft 
Director 


June 26, 2012 

Sue F, McCormick 
Director DWSD 
735 Randolph St 
Detroit, MS 48226 

Dear Ms, McCormick, 

In cooperation with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality [MDEQ] and city engineers, the City of 
Flint has undertaken a review of the regulatory requirements necessary to supply water to our residential and 
commercial customers. As part of our evaluation it was determined that the Flint Water Treatment Plant is 
capable of successfully "blending" or "co-mlngiing" water sources while continuing to provide quality drinking 
water to citizens. 

The Flint Water Treatment Plant would require approximately $1,3 million dollars In increased expenses in 
order to blend as much as one third (1 /3) of treated river water with two thirds (2 /3) of treated DWSD water. 
Using the 2013 DWSD rates this would result In savings of between two and three million dollars annually 
based on current usage data. The MDEQ has provided Flint with written documentation supporting our 
blending of water sources and the potential benefit 

Given this information we respectfully request written permission from DWSD to proceed with 
blending treated Flint River Water with treated DWSD water. 

it should be understood that our goal is to deliver both high quality and economically viable water to our 
customers. This goal has led us to fully consider all available options including purchasing water from the 
Karegnondi Water Authority and use of the Flint River, We believe that in order for an option with DWSD to be 
successful it is essential that along with the proposed authorization to blend water that there is a guaran teed 
containment of the new "fixed costs” that exist in the current fee structure. The new DWSD fixed charge of 
$707,000 each month regardless of amount of water used is five times the original $143,000 each month 
instituted only two years ago. This has resulted In the cost of water from DWSD dropping in recent years as die 
overall fee has increased annually by millions although our usage has continued to decline. The continuation of 
this trend would render our request and goals invalid. 


With the current Emergency Manager condition in Flint we believe that limiting an agreement to only three 
years is appropriate. This time frame would also serve as an evaluation period prior to any proposed long term 
agreement being considered. 

We appreciate your consideration and look forward to working together. 


Michael K, Brown 

Emergency Financial Manager Flint, Mi. 


CITY HALL 1101 S, SAGINAW STREET FUNT, MICHIGAN 48502 TEL: 810-78S-7138 FAX; 810-768-7249 



Sue F, McCormick 8 > DWSD Board 
Director DWSD 
735 Randolph Street 
Detroit, Ml 48228 


Dear DWSD Board; 


During the past nine months we have had several discussions with DWSD 
representatives regarding future water rates and other options including permission for 
Flint to blend treated water from DWSD, Flint currently has received written 
documentation from the state regulatory agency DEQ supporting the ability for Flint to 
safely blend treated water from Detroit. 

in an effort to move forward we must have a written response from the DWSD Board 
that clearly states the following; 

Will DWSD allow Flint to blend treated water from Detroit? 

What are the rates given an estimated usage by Flint and Genesee County of: 

* 23 MGD Average Daily Usage 
® 40 MOD Maximum Day Usage 


We are requesting this information be delivered to Flint no later than October 1, 2012 
so that we may evaluate all of our options and begin moving forward. 



OtfH&ll 

i 101 S. Saginaw S&cct - Flint, Michigan 48502 
SP-7%7346 FAX; S 10-766-72 18 



RICK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 


State of Michigan 

DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY 

Lansing 


ANDY DILLON 
STATE TREASURER 


Mr. Edward Kurtz April 11,2013 

Emergency Manager 
City of Flint 

1101 South Saginaw Street 
Flint, MI 48502 

Dear Mr. Kurtz: 

Thank you for your March 29, 2013 letter, which is attached for reference. As the Emergency 
Manager for the City of Flint (“Flint” or “City”), you have asked for my concurrence, pursuant to 
Public Act 436 of 2012, the Local Financial Stability and Choice Act, to authorize a contract in 
excess of $50,000.00 not subject to competitive bidding. This request was related to the City 
entering into an agreement with the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) for provision of raw 
water for the City. 

In considering your request, I took note of the following facts in support of Flint joining KWA. 
First, there is widespread support in the City for this move, including the support of the Mayor, 
the City Council, and the Emergency Manager. Second, this move will provide a unique 
opportunity for the City and County to partner on an important project, which will hopefully lead 
to future regional collaboration. Third, the Department of Environmental Quality is supportive of 
the City participating in the KWA project. Finally, your representations that this deal will lead to 
substantial savings for the City over the coming decades, savings that are desperately needed to 
help with the turnaround of the City of Flint. 

It is my understanding that the Detroit Water and Sewer Department is making a final best offer 
to Genesee County and the City of Flint next Monday, April 15, 2013. As such, this approval 
will be effective at 5 pm on April 16, 2013 after receiving written notice from the City that either 
no such offer was presented to the county and the City or that an offer was received and was 
rejected in good faith based upon specified objections. 

For the reasons described above and subject to the conditions set forth herein, pursuant to 
Section 12 (3) of PA 436 of 2012, 1 am authorizing you to proceed with adopting the resolution 
and entering into a contract with KWA. 



P.O. BOX 30716 » LANSING, MICHIGAN 48909 
www.michigan.gov/treasury • (517) 373-3200 




CITY OF FLINT 

OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGER 
EDWARD J. KURTZ 


ELECTRONIC LETTER 
April 18, 2013 


Andy Dion 
Stale Treasurer 
P. O. Box 30718 
Lansing, Ml 48309 


Dear I reasurer Dion; 

Flint, Genesee County and KWA received an eight page letter from Detroit Water and 
Sewerage Department (DWSD) offering a framework for a long-term agreement with 
our region. Two scenarios were presented; 


This offer was dismissed immediately because Flint would still be responsible for their 
share of the KWA water pipeline delivery system estimated to be $78 million. In 
addition Flint wouid not be able to operate the Hint Water Riant in which we have 
invested over $40 million per IMDEG mandates over the past ten years. Finally, 
although DWSD shows this as an option and supplied a per month cost projection for 
the first year, no total costs over the life of the contract were provided. 

Scenario 2; Tull Service" Water Supply 

This offer was also rejected, DWSD would supply water to Flint/Genesee the same way 
they currently are today. They wouid change the method of calculating our bill The 
offer would provide a $100 per ccf reduction on our usage for the first year, providing a 
30 year contract is signed. 

After review of the offer, Flint/Genesee has the following concerns: 


City list! 

UOl S. Sagtaaw Street -Flint, Michigan 48502 
. .$.10-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7238 wwwxltvoMfeu.com 



Andy Dillon, State Treasurer 
April 18, 2013 
Page 2 


1 , DWSD’s offer is a framework subject to negotiations and Is not a firm offer. 


2. DWSD’s offer is based on 40.8 mgd, the KWA plan is based on SO mgd. 
Fiinf/Genasee last summer hit the peak of 40.8 mgd and this DWSD offer 
provides no room for growth. Growth would result in penalties or added cost 

3, DWSD's offer does not include a guaranteed rate for years two through thirty, nor 
does it provide a maximum annual increase. 


4. DWSD’s offer does not provide a redundant supply for GCDG. 

5. DWSD’s offer does not allow for the use of Flint’s existing water plant. 

8. The offer indicates that the tote! cost to Flint over the life of the contract would be 
$587,990,688. No indication of what annual rate of Increase was used in this 
projection. Flint can only assume it b 4.4% based on the Tucker Young report. It 
is also based on 40.8 mgds. KWA's proposal is for $643,775,188 based on 
SOrngds (33% more). Based on 80 mgds DWSD’s proposal would be 
$868,350,738. 

On a final note, Flint/Genesee has great concern over the accuracy of the figures 
provided by DWSD. Attachment 1 indicates that our joint annual cost to DWSD is $50 
million; actual cost Is less than $25 million. Attachment 2 indicates $800 million in 
savings over the next 30 years. That Is greater than the total cost we would pay DWSD, 

Therefore, I will sign the resolution to join KWA at the close of business today. 



Edward J. Kurtz 
Emergency Manager 





I CiTYOf D? : sort 
WATi:« ant* Su ; , A«;x;S(.i!: 
Oi fiCi- Ti!f fteCKW 


755 Ranuoito Sm*sf 
Drrxovr. 2-3 sen- ;a v 48226 

’wW \V. >!.<• IT T^OXT'M 5 *C)OV 


. Via Certified Mai! and Electronic Delivery 

Ms. Inez M. Brow 
City Clerk 
City of Flint 
2nd Floor, City Bali 
1 1 01 S. Saginaw Street 
Flint, Michigan 48102; 

Dear Ms. Brown: 


» *•< 






&<v> 


Regarding: Termination of Contract for the Provision of Water Services 

by the City of Detroit, Water and Sewerage Department 

On December 20, 1965, die City' of Detroit, through its Board of Water Commissioners, 
(DWSD) and the City of Mint. Michigan (Flint) entered into a contract for the provision of 
DWSD treated water to Flint and the distribution by flint of that water to other Genesee County 
communities. Section 18 of that Agreement 5 provides: 

l§. The Board {DWSD] shall supply and sell water to the City' [Flint] from fo e water xsystem of 
the City of Detroit, and the City shall receive and purchase such water in accordance with the 
terms of this Agreement for an indefinite period of time but at least for a period of thirty- five 
(35) years from the date hereof. This Agreement may be terminated by either party after 
expiration of said 35-year period, upon one year's written notice served upon the other party by 
delivering the same to the Secretary of the Board or to the Clerk of the City as the case may be, 
or at any time upon mutual consent of both parties. 

Please take notice that pursuant to this section, 18, of the above-referenced Agreement, DWSD is 
terminating this Agreement one year from today's date (April 1 7, 2014), 


Sincerely yours, 

'"""'I ^ 

Sue F. McCormick 
Director 


A [though the Agreement between DWSD has been: sub: 
fis.ii effect. 


led. Section i 8 remains unchanged and hi 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Tuesday, October 20, 2015 8:59 AM 
Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Murray, David (GOV) 

Fwd: Earley Flint Water OpEd-FOR REVIEW AND INPUT 


Can you send me the oped? It's not in Dennis' email. 


Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" < mu eh mored@mieht g a n . go v> 
Date: October 20, 2015 at 8:32:18 AMEDT 


To: "Baird, Richard (GOV)" <bairdr@michigan. gov >. "Saxton, Thomas (Treasury)" 

<SaxtonT @ miehig a n.g o v>, "Khouri, Nick (TREASURY)" <KhouriN @m lchig a n.g o v>. 

"Stanton, Terry A. (Treasury)" <StantonT @michi gan.. go v> . "Workman, Wayne (TREASURY)" 
<WorkmanW@miehigan.gov >. "Wurfel, Sara (GOV)" <Wurfels@michigan. gov >. "Murray, 
David (GOV)" < MurrayD 1 @michigan.gov >. "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" <AgenJ@michigan. gov >. 
"Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" < c k nnente@michigan.gov > 

Subject: RE: Earley Flint Water OpEd-FOR REVIEW AND INPUT 


I know that no one is going to want to do this, but I don't feel that it is unfair for Darnell to set the 
record straight. This should be a decision for the G, Jarrod and Dan, however, my guess is that Darnell 
is not going to quietly accept the abuse of the Flint people without having his voice heard. 


From: Michelle Zdrodowski [mjjjto:m(chej^ 

Sent: Monday, October 19, 2015 5:13 PM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <0Xy.?hmore^ Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Paul Conners <conn^ Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) 

.0 A i.^.b.iEf^.O.'.RO.Y 5, J Khouri, Nick (TREASURY) <KhourjN.(j§^ Stanton, Terry A. 

(T reasury) <Stanto^ Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) <Wo 

Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wu rfe l s<jjpmichigan.gov> : Murray, David (GOV) <MufrayDl@.m 
haddenf@michigan.gov 

Cc: Darnell Earley < darneH.earlev@detroitkl2.org >; Kelly Rossman-McKinney 
< krossman®truscottrcssman.com > 

Subject: Earley Flint Water OpEd-FOR REVIEW AND INPUT 

All, 

Darnell Earley asked that I send you the draft of an OpEd regarding the Flint Water issue that he 
would like to send to the media this week. 

He is seeking your input before sending, and is looking for any feedback you might have by 
tomorrow afternoon. He has intentionally placed it on his EM letterhead as he is still acting in 
the capacity of an EM. 


Thank you. 



Michelle Z. 


Michelle A. Zdrodowski 

Executive Director of Communications 

Detroit Public Schools 

3011 W. Grand Boulevard, 14th Floor 

Detroit, Ml 48202 

313.873.3238, office 



From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 20, 2015 12:25 PM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Cc: Baird, Richard (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth 

(GOV) 

Subject: Re: Earley Flint Water OpEd-FOR REVIEW AND INPUT 


I'll raise it with the Governor at Comms Update today. 
But I'm fine with the op-ed, minus the Ghandi quote. 


On Oct 20, 2015, at 8:32 AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michi gan. gov> wrote; 

I know that no one is going to want to do this, but I don't feel that it is unfair for Darneli to set the 
record straight. This should be a decision for the G, Jarrod and Dan, however, my guess is that Darnel! 
is not going to quietly accept the abuse of the Flint people without having his voice heard. 


From: Michelle Zdrodowski [ mailto:michene.zdrodowski@detroitkl2.orgl 

Sent: Monday, October 19, 2015 5:13 PM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <r nu chrnore d@michigan .gov>; Baird, Richard (GOV) 

<bairdr@mlchigan.gov>; Paul Conners < con nerep@michj gan .gov>; Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) 
<SaxtonT@mjchigan.gov>; Khouri, Nick (TREASURY) <KhouriN@michigari.gov>; Stanton, Terry A. 

(Treasury) <StantonT@mich?gan,gov>; Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) < Wor km a nW @ m I eh iga n ,gov>; 
Wurfel, Sara (GOV) <Wurfeis@nhchigan.gov>; Murray, David (GOV) <rv:urravDl@michlgan.gov>; 
haddenf@mlchigan.gov 

Cc: Darnell Earley <darneli,eadey@detroitkl2.org>; Kelly Rossman-McKinney 
<krossrii3n@truscottrossman.com> 

Subject: Earley Flint Water OpEd-FOR REVIEW AND INPUT 

All, 

Darnell Earley asked that I send you the draft of an OpEd regarding the Flint Water issue that he 
would like to send to the media this week. 

He is seeking your input before sending, and is looking for any feedback you might have by 
tomorrow afternoon. He has intentionally placed it on his EM letterhead as he is still acting in 
the capacity of an EM. 

Thank you. 

Michelle Z. 


Michelle A. Zdrodowski 

Executive Director of Communications 


l 



Detroit Public Schools 

3011 W. Grand Boulevard, 14th Floor 

Detroit, Ml 48202 

313.873.3238, office 



From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 20, 2015 5:19 PM 

To: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Subject: For Flint After Action meeting 

Attachments: PR 151020 Flint after action. docx; Kolb Resume.pdf; CV_Davis M_010ct2015.pdf; 

EPR_RESUME_COSA-EXP WIT_MASTER II.doc 


Attached is a draft press release to be reviewed with the after action team tomorrow morning. 

In addition, Rich & Harvey are vetting & reaching out to two potential Flint residents to join the task force: 

1) Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, MD of Mott Children's Hospital, long standing and respected member of the 
Flint community, speaks his mind and very professional. 

2) Dr. Clarence Philips, MD of the Hamilton Health Center that serves the indigent population in 
Flint. Again, long standing and respected member of the Flint community, speaks his mind and very 
professional. 

Depending on which one is selected. Rich will invite them to the meeting tomorrow by phone or in person. 
Attached are resumes for Kolb, Dr. Davis, and Eric Rothstein. 

Draft Agenda: 

1 ) Introductions 

2) Mission of Task Force 

3) Background Info 

4) Discussion of Timeline 

5) Q & A from Task Force Members 

6) Communications Strategy/Review Press Release 


Suggested Goals for Task Force: 

1) Thorough review of all steps taken in Flint regarding switch to Flint River and back GLWA. 

a. Create Timeline of actions 

b. Establish why each action was taken 

2) Review of role of Feds, EM, State, City Council, and Mayor in process. 

a. Establish best practices for Feds, State, Local, and EM to work together in future situations 

b. Indicate where coordination could have been and should be improved 

3) Review of DEQ & DHHS actions & protocols 

a. Did DEQ & DHHS follow the proper procedures? 

b. Do the procedures need to change? 

4) Provide guidance for switch back to GWLA 

a. Ensure proper corrosion controls & testing is in place 

b. Highlight steps for eventual switch to Karegnondi 


l 



5) Testing Beyond Flint 

a. What practices need to change in communities outside of Flint? 

b. What change in law is recommended to ensure all Michiganders are drinking clean water? 


Suggested Timeline: 


The task force members have indicated that 2 months is the earliest possible time to properly conduct a full after 
action report. In reality, they suggest 3 months is more feasible. Given the holidays, a 2 month timeline puts us 
roughly right around Christmas. I would suggest we set a 3 month goal. 

Oct 21: After Action Team Announced 

Jan 8: Preliminary After Action Report Submitted for Internal Review 
Jan 22: Final After Action Report Submitted 
Week of January 25: Report Released 


2 



RICK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 


State op Michigan 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE 

LANSING 


BRIAN GALLEY 
L.T. GOVERNOR 


Contacts: 

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 

Sara Wurfel or Dave Murray 

517-335-6397 

Wednesday, Oct. 21, 2015 


Gov. Rick Snyder announces formation of Flint Water 
After Action Report Commission 

Experts will provide ongoing monitoring of city water system 

LANSING, Mich. - Gov. Rick Snyder today announced a new task force to review the 
state’s actions regarding water usage and testing in Flint. The commission will conduct 
a thorough review and lay out recommendations on future guidelines for water testing. It 
will also monitor the transition of Flint’s city water system back to the Great Lakes Water 
Authority, and its eventual transition to the Karegnondi Water Authority pipeline. 

The commission will be co-chaired by Ken Sikkema of Public Sector Consultants and 
Chris Kolb, of the Michigan Environmental Council. Also serving will be Dr. Matthew 
Davis of the University of Michigan Health System, and Eric Rothstein, of the Galardi 
Rothstein Group. 

“As stated previously, transitioning back to the Great Lakes Water Authority is a good 
first step to protecting public health in Flint, but it’s not the last step,” Snyder said. 
“Bringing in outside experts to evaluate our actions and help monitor and advise on 
technical issues will be key to continuing work on the comprehensive action plan and 
ensuring safe drinking water for all the citizens of Flint.” 

Ken Sikkema is a senior policy fellow at Public Sector Consultants, where he 
specializes in public finance, environment, and energy policy. Prior to joining the firm, 
Sikkema served in both the Michigan House and Senate, culminating with four years as 
Senate Majority Leader. He has also served as both an adjunct and visiting professor at 
Grand Valley State University. 

Chris Kolb is president of the Michigan Environmental Council, a statewide coalition of 
70 environmental, public health and faith-based nonprofit groups. Before joining the 
MEC, Kolb represented Ann Arbor in the state House for six years and served eight 
years on the Ann Arbor City Council. He has been president of the MEC for eight years. 

Matthew Davis, M.D., M.A.P.P., is Professor of Pediatrics and Internal Medicine at the 
University of Michigan Health System and Professor of Public Policy at the Gerald R. 
Ford School at the University of Michigan, having joined the faculty in 2000. He is the 
founding Director of the C.S. Mott Children's Hospital National Poll on Children's Health 
and the National Voices Project. Dr. Davis also previously served as the Chief Medical 




Executive of the Michigan Department of Community Health/Department of Health and 
Human Services. 

Eric Rothstein is a national water issues consultant and principal at the Galardi 
Rothstein Group. He served as an independent advisor on the creation of the Great 
Lakes Water Authority. Rothstein also has served as Jefferson County, Alabama’s rate 
consultant and municipal advisor for litigation related to the county’s bankruptcy and 
issuance of $1 .7 billion in sewer warrants and led strategic financial planning for the City 
of Atlanta’s Department of Watershed Management. He has more than 30 years of 
experience in water, wastewater and stormwater utility finance and rate-making 
assessments. 

As Gov. Snyder previously stated, reconnecting with the authority will not completely 
resolve the city’s problem with lead service lines or aging infrastructure. It will take time 
for pipes in Flint to become coated with the phosphate corrosion control. 

To best protect public health, state and local authorities will continue to carry out steps 
outlined on Oct. 2 in a comprehensive action plan, including continued testing, the use 
of faucet filters and providing residents with accurate information about steps to 
eliminate lead exposure. The Michigan Departments of Environmental Quality is 
continuing to provide free water filters, free lead testing through the state laboratory for 
Flint water customers, and hiring additional staff to conduct health exposure monitoring 
for lead in drinking water. 


II // a a 
Tl.Tl.TlTl. 
II II II II 



Chris Kolb 


EDUCATION : The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 

Bachelor of Science in Natural Resources, GPA 3,55 
Dean’s List, Honors Society 

Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 

Graduate studies in Political Science focusing on Quantitative Analysis, and Interest Group 
Politics; Scholarship, Grant, and Fellowship Recipient. Accepted into advanced studies for 
PhD. 

EXPERIENCE: Executive Director, Current 

Unity Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 

Responsible for the organization and implementation of the new statewide campaign, to 
create a progressive Michigan by advancing lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) 
and social justice values and issues. Coordinate and implement the collaborative efforts of 
five leading LGBT and equality organizations; ACLU of Michigan, Affirmations, Michigan 
Equality, SPICE, and Triangle Foundation. Lead the campaign’s research and subsequent 
activities in Michigan. Successfully developed and implemented a primary election strategy 
in legislative races. Engage in successful communications with the LGBT community, the 
campaign’s supporters and partners, and supportive national groups. Coordinate a broad, 
effective campaign, with consultants, including coalition building, list building, voter contact 
and get-out-the-vote activities. Represent the organization at meetings and events with the 
public and press. 

Vice President for Public Affairs, 2007-2008 

Early Childhood Investment Corporation, Lansing Michigan 

Directed all public affairs activities in a statewide effort to improve the status of 
Michigan’s children, aged zero to five. Developed and implemented public policy at the 
federal, state and local levels working with key decision-makers, staff and public. Educated 
and informed elected officials on the importance of investing in early childhood. Secured 
increased funding over $11 million, including $5.75 million for ECIC. Helped to develop 
Governor’s $30 million early childhood initiative outlined in Fiscal 2009 budget. 
Successfully planned 2008 Star Power Rally at the Capitol for over 500 early childhood 
supporters. Coordinated activities of the Michigan Legislative Children’s Caucus; worked 
directly with state departments involved in early childhood development including 
Community Health, Education, Human Services, and Labor and Economic Growth; provided 
speakers and testimony to legislative hearings to inform and educate Legislature; reviewed 
and monitored all legislation impacting early childhood development; provided training to 
local Great Start Collaborative® to work with their local, state, and federal decision-makers; 
coordinated development of an early childhood public policy agenda; and, worked to 
increase knowledge of Legislature and public on importance of early childhood 
development, advance public education, and increase public and private investment in 
Michigan’s children. 

State Representative, 2001-2006 

53 rd State House District, Lansing, Michigan 

Three-term State Representative, appointed for two terms (2003-2006) to the House 
Appropriations Committee served as the Ranking Democrat on four appropriations 



subcommittees: Economic Development, Department of Environmental Quality, Higher 
Education, and the Department of Human Services, and. served on the Corrections 
subcommittee (2003-4). In second term, was appointed by Governor Granholm to serve on 
the Michigan Land Use Leadership Council to develop a report and recommendations for the 
Governor and Legislature on land use issues. Appointed Ranking Democrat on. the House 
Committee on Land Use and Environment (2001-2002), and served on the House Commerce 
Committee (2001-2002). Authored numerous legislation enacted into law, including 
legislation creating joint planning commissions, Land Bank Fast Track authorities, open 
space ordinance requirement for local governments, lead poisoning prevention for children, 
regulation of polybrominated biphenyl ethers (PBDEs), renewal of the baseline 
environmental assessment fee, establishment of the refined, petroleum product cleanup 
program, to help clean up leaking underground storage tanks, welfare reform and a. bill to 
help create the Fire Services Bureau. Legislative focus included, land use and planning, the 
environment, natural resources, toxins, children’s health, alternative energy, economic 
development, mental health, higher education, and civil rights, 

Legislative Assistant, 1999-2000 
52 nsJ District, Lansing Michigan 

Served as a Legislative Assistant to Representative John Hansen, provided, policy research, 
constituent services, reviewed legislation and executive budget data, and attended meetings 
on behalf of the Representative in the District. Contacted constituents and interest groups, 
assisted with amendments and bill development. 

Environmental Consultant 
Ann Arbor, Michigan 1993-1999 

Provided consulting services in the environmental management and compliance field to 
businesses in Michigan and Ohio. Consulting services specialized in solid waste 
management, waste reduction, and recycling, environmental compliance and permitting, 
worker safety training, and project management including on-site facility management. 

Legislator of the Year, Michigan Fire Chiefs, 2006 
Presidents Award, Michigan Fire Inspectors Society, 2006 
Co-Chair of the Fire Sendee Legislative Caucus 
The 2005 Legislative Award from the Michigan Audubon Society' 

Liberty Bell Award, Washtenaw County Bar Association, 2004 

Legislative Award from the National Alliance on Mental Illness, 2004 

Environmental Stewardship Award, Sierra Club, Mackinac Chapter, 2004 

Legislator of the Year, U of M Students of Choice and College Democrats, 2003 

Freedom Award, St. Mary’s Christian Fellowship, 2002 

Legislative Award from the Michigan League of Conservation Voters, 2002 

Henry Toll Fellowship Leadership Class of 2002, Council of State Governments (CSG) 

Legislator of the Year, Association for Children's Mental Health. 2001 

Bowhay Institute for Legislative Leadership, CSG - Midwest, 2001 

Next Generation Leadership Class at East-West Center, University of Hawaii, 1996 

Ann Arbor City Councilmember, 1993-2000, Mayor Pro-tem, 1994-2000# 

HD 7 / AIDS Resource Center Board of Directors, Chair; Girl Scout Council of Huron 
Valley, Board of Directors; previously served as Co-Chair of the Affordable Housing Task 
Force, Washtenaw County Solid Waste Planning Commission, and Michigan Municipal 
League’s Transportation and Environmental Committee; volunteered for organizations 
involving environment, youth, hunger, LGBT, housing, health care, veterans and religious 
organizations. 



Matthew M. Davis, M.D., M.A.P.P. 

Professor of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases 
Professor of Internal Medicine 
Professor of Public Policy 
Professor of Health Management and Policy 
University of Michigan 



EDUCATION 

HIGH SCHOOL Eden Senior High School (19S 1-1985) 

Eden, New York 

UNDERGRADUATE Swarthmore College (1985-1989) BA with honors, 1989 

Swarthmore, Pennsylvania 
Major Field: Biology 

PROFESSIONAL Harvard Medical School (1990-1994) MD cum laude, 1994 

Boston, Massachusetts 

Irving B. Harris School of 

Public Policy Studies (1999-2000) MAPP, 2000 
University of Chicago 
Chicago, Illinois 


POSTDOCTORAL TRAINING 


Internship in Internal Medicine and Pediatrics June 1994 - June 1995 

Brigham & Women’s Hospital and The Children’s Hospital 
Boston, Massachusetts 

Residency in Internal Medicine and Pediatrics June 1995 - June 1998 

Harvard Combined Residency in Medicine and Pediatrics 
Boston, Massachusetts 

Acting Chief Residency in Primary Care/Intemal Medicine July 1997 - November 1997 

Brigham and Women’s Hospital 
Boston, Massachusetts 

Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Clinical Scholars Program July 1998 - June 2000 

University of Chicago 
Chicago, Illinois 


Davis CV 


1 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 


CERTIFICATION AND LICENSURE 


State of Massachusetts full medical license #155272 
State of Illinois full medical license #0036-098102 
State of Michigan full medical license #J693073 
Drug Enforcement Administration Certificate #BD5935575 
Diplomate of the American Board of Pediatrics, #064080 

- Recertified through 12/31/2017 

Diplomate of the American Board of Internal Medicine, #194261 

- Recertified through 12/31/2021 


ACADEMIC APPOINTMENTS 


Lecturer in Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases and 
Internal Medicine 
University of Michigan 

Core Faculty, Child Health Evaluation and Research (CHEAR) Unit 
Division of General Pediatrics, 

University of Michigan 

Core Faculty, Pediatric Health Services Research Fellowship Program, 
Division of General Pediatrics 
University of Michigan 

Affiliated Faculty, Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program 
University of Michigan 

Assistant Professor in Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases and 
Internal Medicine 
University of Michigan 

Affiliated Faculty, National Poverty Center, Gerald R. Ford 
School of Public Policy 
University of Michigan 

Assistant Professor of Public Policy, Gerald R. Ford School of 
Public Policy 
University of Michigan 

Core Faculty, Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program 
University of Michigan 

Associate Professor of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, 

Internal Medicine, and Public Policy 
University of Michigan 

Professor of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, 

Internal Medicine, and Public Policy 
University of Michigan 

Professor of Health Management and Policy 

School of Public Health, University of Michigan 


1997- 1998 
1998 -2001 
2000 - 
2000 - 

1998 - 

1999 - 

July 2000 - February 2002 

July 2000 - 

July 2000 - 

July 2000 - June 2004 
February 2002 - August 2006 

July 2003 - 

January 2004 - September 2006 
July 2004 - 

September 2006 - August 2013 
September 2013 - 
January 2014 - 


Davis CV 


2 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



ACADEMIC ADMINISTRATIVE APPOINTMENTS 


Co-Director, Pediatric Health Services Research Fellowship Program, 
Division of General Pediatrics, University of Michigan 

Co-Director, Resident Elective in Pediatric Health Services Research 
for Under-represented Minorities, Division of 
General Pediatrics, University of Michigan 

Director, Resident Elective in Pediatric Health Services Research 
for Under-represented Minorities, Division of 
General Pediatrics, University of Michigan 

Director, Fellowship Program in Pediatric Health Services Research, 
Division of General Pediatrics, University of Michigan 

Associate Director, Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program, 
University of Michigan 

Co-Director, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Clinical Scholars 
Program, University of Michigan 

Co-Director, Child Health Initiative Working Group, Michigan 
Institute for Clinical & Health Research (CTSA), 

University of Michigan 

Director, Child Health Initiatives Working Group, Michigan 
Institute for Clinical & Health Research (CTSA), 

University of Michigan 

Associate Director, Michigan Institute for Clinical & Health Research 
(CTSA), University of Michigan 

Faculty Director, Path of Excellence in Health Policy — Programs, 
Systems, and Economics, University of Michigan Medical 
School 

Director, Communities Engagement Core and Participant Recruitment 
Core, Michigan Institute for Clinical & Health 
Research (MICHR) 

Deputy Director, Institute for Healthcare Policy and Innovation, 
University of Michigan 


CLINICAL/HOSPITAL APPOINTMENTS 


Clinical Instructor in Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, 

Harvard Medical School 

Clinical Instructor in Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, 

University of Chicago, Pritzker School of Medicine 
Staff Physician in Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases and 

Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Health System 


PUBLIC HEALTH / HEALTH POLICY APPOINTMENTS 


Chief Medical Executive, Department of Community Health and 

Department of Health and Human Services, State of Michigan 


July 2003 - June 2006 
July 2003 - June 2005 

July 2005 - 

July 2006 - 

July 2007 - June 2008 

July 2008 - 

May 2011 - Sep 2011 

Sep 2011 - March 2013 

Jan 2012 -March 2013 
November 2014 - 

Jan 2015 - 

May 2015 - 

June 1994 - June 1998 
July 1998 - June 2000 
July 2000 - 

March 2013 - April 2015 


Davis CV 


3 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



GRANT SUPPORT 


Current 

Principal Investigator: National Voices Project 
W.K. Kellogg Foundation 
Total cost: $2,135,229. July 2011 - June 2016. 

Principal Investigator: C.S. Mott Children ’s Hospital National Poll on Children ’s Health 
University of Michigan Flealth System 
Total cost: $1,868,800. July 2010 - June 2016. 

Principal Investigator: Health Homes Project - Planning and Evaluation 
Michigan Department of Flealth and Human Services 
Total cost: $272,000. May 2015 - September 2016. 

Co-Investigator (PI: G Mashour): Michigan Institute for Clinical and Health Research 
NIH / National Center for Advancing Translational Science 
Total cost: $48,788,667. June 2012 - May 2017. 


Recent 

Principal Investigator: Pediatric Health Services Research Training (T32) 

Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute for Child Health and Human Development 
Total cost: $1,271,100. May 2010 - June 2015. 

Principal Investigator: Coursera Initiative: Understanding and Improving the US Healthcare System. 
University of Michigan Medical School. 

Total cost: $10,000. January 2013 - December 2013. 

Principal Investigator: The Michigan Child Health Research Priorities (M-CHRP) Project 
Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases 
Total cost: $20,000. February 2012 - February 2013. 

Principal Investigator: Economics of Vaccines - Tracking Vaccines under Development to Determine 
Cost Drivers of the Vaccine Development and Approval Process 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
Total cost: $498,038. September 2009 - September 2011. 

Principal Investigator: Voices National Poll 
W.K. Kellogg Foundation 

Total cost: $100,000. April 2010 - September 2010. 

Principal Investigator: Innovation Bridge - Linking Biotech Breakthroughs to Emerging Vaccine 
Manufacturers 

Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation 

Total cost: $100,000. October 2008 - September 2009. 

Principal Investigator: Using MEPS Data to Inform Public-Plan Consumerism 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
Total cost: $99,999. July 2007 - June 2008. 

Principal Investigator: Insurance Coverage of Child, Adolescent, and Adult Vaccines 
Partnership for Prevention 
Total cost: $124,995. May 2006 - October 2007. 

Principal Investigator: Health Tracking 

Center for Studying Health System Change 

Total cost: $97,171. November 2006 - December 2007. 


Davis CV 


4 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Principal Investigator: Future Costs of Childhood Obesity: Estimates and Implications 
United States Department of Agriculture 
Total cost: $150,000. October 2004 - September 2006. 

Principal Investigator: Market Forces or Misinformation? Exploring the Link Between Self-Insuring 
Employers and Underinsurance 

Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Generalist Physician Faculty Scholars Program 
Total cost: $299,769. July 2002 - June 2006. 

Principal Investigator: How Adult Diabetes Interventions Affect Children 
Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan Foundation 
Total cost: $10,000. September 2005 - June 2006. 

Principal Investigator: Summer Workshop in Michigan Medicaid Research 
National Poverty Center 
Total cost: $10,000. May 2005 - April 2006. 

Principal Investigator: Increasing Costs of Public-Sector Purchase of Childhood Vaccines 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 

Total cost: $200,693. September 2001 - September 2003. 

Principal Investigator: Evaluation of the Etiologies of Transitions in Children ’s Insurance Status and 
Effects on Healthcare Utilization and Expenditures 

Economic Research Initiative on the Uninsured (Robert Wood Johnson Foundation) 

Total cost: $63,961. April 2003 - December 2004. 

Co-Investigator: Variation in Immunization Practices 
(PI: Gary L. Freed, MD, MPH) 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 

Total cost: $1,400,000. September 2004 - October 2013. 

Co-Investigator: BMI2 - Brief Motivational Interviewing to Reduce Child BMI 
(PI: Kenneth Resnicow, PhD) 

Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute for Child Health and Human Development 
Total cost: $3,416,177. April 2008-June 2013. 

Co-Investigator: Mobilizing Peer Support for Effective Congestive Heart Failure Self-Management 
(PI: Michele Heisler, MD, MPA) 

National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
Total cost: $2,018,444. July 2006 - June 2011. 

Co-Investigator and Faculty Mentor: OB CARES: The Obstetric Clinics and Resources Study 
(PI: Christie Lancaster, MD, MSc) 

Michigan Institute for Clinical & Health Research 
Total cost: $4,644. February 2010 - June 2011. 

Co-Investigator: Pediatric and Managed Care Issues — Medicaid 
(PI: Gary L. Freed) 

State of Michigan Department of Community Health 
Total cost: $1,087,676. October 2005 - September 2006. 

Co-Investigator: Enhancing Private Provider Immunization Recall 
(PI: Kevin J. Dombkowski, DrPH) 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 

Total cost: $600,000. October 2006 - November 2009. 

Co-Investigator and Faculty Mentor: A National Study of Health Care Among Foster Children 
(PI: Sandra H. Jee, MD, MPH) 

Ambulatory Pediatric Association 

Total cost: $10,000. July 2003 - June 2004. 


Davis CV 


5 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Co-Investigator and Faculty Mentor: Healthcare Expenditures and Utilization Among Overweight Youth 
(PI: Ins R. Mabry, MD, MPH) 

National Poverty Center 

Total cost: $9,640. July 2003 - June 2004. 


HONORS AND AWARDS 


National Scholar, Swarthmore College 1985 - 1989 

Garrigues Music Scholar, Swarthmore College 1987 - 1989 

Ivy Award (for contributions to the college community), 1989 

Swarthmore College 

Phi Beta Kappa, Swarthmore College chapter 1989 

Paul Dudley White Fellowship in International Health, 1991, 1993 

Harvard Medical School 

Pediatric Prize, New England Pediatric Society 1994 

Arnold Dunn Award (for compassionate patient care), 1 995 

Brigham and Women's Hospital 

Irving B. Harris Fellow in Child Policy, University of Chicago 1999 - 2000 

Outstanding Educator, Division of General Pediatrics, 200 1 

University of Michigan 

Young Investigator Award in Clinical and Health Services Research, 2001 


Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan 
Milton W. Hamolsky Junior Faculty Award, Society of 

General Internal Medicine, annual national meeting 
Outstanding Abstract, Academy of Health Services Research 
and Health Policy, annual national meeting 
Young Investigator Award in Clinical Research, 

Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan 
Teaching Honor Roll, Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy, 

University of Michigan 

Token of Appreciation from Medical Students, University of 
Michigan Medical School 

National Nemours Award in Child Health Services Research 
Featured Vaccinologist, Human Vaccines 
Associate Chair for Research Award, Department of Pediatrics 
and Communicable Diseases, to support The Michigan 
Child Health Research Priorities (M-CHRP) Project 
Distinguished Mentor Award, Michigan Institute of Clinical and 
Health Research, University of Michigan 
Mentor Recognition for Fellow’s Research Award presented to 
Stephen W. Patrick, Ambulatory Pediatric Association 
Principal Investigator, “WellSpringboard” - First Place Winner 
in Patient- Centered Outcomes Research Institute 
Challenge Initiative 

Principal Investigator, “WellSpringboard” - Second Place Winner 2014 
in Patient- Centered Outcomes Research Institute 
Matchmaking App Challenge 


2002 

2002 

2003 

2004-2006, 2008,2010, 2012, 

2013,2015 

2007, 2009 

2007 

2010 

2012 

2012 

2012 

2013 


Davis CV 


6 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Snyder Memorial Lecturer in Medicine and the Humanities, 2014 

Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, PA 

Visiting Professor, Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia 2014 
Inaugural Visiting Professor in Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, 2015 

Children’s Hospital and Brigham & Women’s Hospital, 

Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 

Visiting Professor, PolicyLab, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia 2015 
Philadelphia, PA 

Regents’ Award for Distinguished Public Service, University of 2015 

Michigan 


MEMBERSHIPS IN PROFESSIONAL SOCIETIES 


Society of General Internal Medicine 1998 - 

Society for Medical Decision-Making 1999 - 

Ambulatory Pediatric Association / Academic Pediatric Association 2000 - 
Association of Teachers of Preventive Medicine 200 1 - 

AcademyHealth (formerly Association of Health Services 200 1 - 

Research and Health Policy) 

American College of Physicians / American Society of 2002 - 

Internal Medicine 

Society for Pediatric Research (elected) 2004 - 


SCIENTIFIC ACTIVITIES 


Chair, Planning Committee for the Robert Wood Johnson Clinical 
Scholars Program annual Health Economics Symposium 
Peer Reviewer, Journal of the Ambulatory Pediatric Association/ 
Ambulatory Pediatrics/Academic Pediatrics 
Peer Reviewer, Journal of General Internal Medicine 
Peer Reviewer, Up-To-Date 

Peer Reviewer, Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine / 
JAMA-Pediatrics 
Peer Reviewer, JAMA 

Peer Reviewer, Journal of Health Policy, Politics, and Law 
Peer Reviewer, Annals of Internal Medicine 
Peer Reviewer, American Journal of Managed Care 
Peer Reviewer, National Poverty Center grants program 
Member, Editorial Board, Ambulatory Pediatrics 
Peer Reviewer, Ambulatory Pediatric Association Y oung Investigators 
Grants Program 

Peer Reviewer, Journal of Policy and Management 
Peer Reviewer, Health Services Research 
Peer Reviewer, Vaccine 

Lead Author, Guidelines for Prevention of Childhood Obesity, 

American Medical Association and American Academy of 


2000 

2000 - 

2000 - 

2000-2003,2010 
2001 - 

2001 - 
2001 - 
2002 - 
2003 - 
2003 - 2006 
2005 - 2007 
2005 - 2007 

2005 - 
2005 - 
2005 - 
2005 - 2007 


Davis CV 


7 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Pediatrics 

Member, Influenza Vaccine Group, American Heart Association 2006 - 

Peer Reviewer, Health Affairs 2006 - 

Study Section Member - Health, Behavior, and Context 2006 

Subcommittee, National Institutes of Health 
Senior Health Researcher, Center for Studying Health System Change, 2006 - 2007 
Washington, DC 

Member, Editorial Board, Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine / JAMA-Pediatrics 

Founding Director, C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on 
Children’s Health, University of Michigan 
Peer Reviewer, New England Journal of Medicine 
Founding Web Editor, Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine / JAMA-Pediatrics 

Study Section Member - Disease, Disability, and Injury Prevention 
and Control Special Emphasis Panel, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention 

Member, Expert Advisory Committee, Measuring Pediatric Access 
to Specialty Health Care by Insurance Status (PI: Karin 
Rhodes, MD, MS; funded by State of Illinois) 

Co-Guest Editor, Special Issue on “Bridging the Gap Between 

Research and Health Policy,” HSR - Health Services Research 
Chair, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health 2011 
Promotion Special Emphasis Panel, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention 

Member, Special Advisory Panel to the Director of the National 2013 - 2014 

Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National 
Institutes of Health 

Member, Special Review Panel, National Institute of Diabetes and 2015 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health 


2007-2013 

2007- 

2008- 

2008- 2013 

2009 

2009- 2012 

2010 - 2012 


TEACHING ACTIVITIES 


Intramural Invited Presentations (selected) 

“Teen problem-solving and its impact on tobacco use.” 1 999 

Grand Rounds, Department of Pediatrics, Pritzker School 
of Medicine, University of Chicago. 

Health Services Research Seminar (semi-annually), 2000 - 

Child Health Evaluation and Research (CHEAR) Unit, 

Division of General Pediatrics, University of Michigan 

“Are parental depressive symptoms linked to underimmunization 200 1 

of young children?” Grand Rounds, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Michigan 

“Smallpox: new challenges from an old foe,” Grand Rounds, 2002 

Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan 


Davis CV 


8 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



“The Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement and Modernization 2004 
Act of 2003: Policy Implications.” Faculty panelist. 

University of Michigan. 

“Obesity trends during childhood and adolescence: insights for 2005 

clinicians and policymakers”. Grand Rounds, Department 
of Pediatrics, 

University of Michigan 

“Obesity trends during childhood and adolescence: findings from 2005 

the PSID-CDS”, invited speaker. Series on the Panel 
Study of Income Dynamics, Institute for Social Research, 

University of Michigan 

“Are the best vaccines still ahead, or already behind us? Costs, 2008 

contradictions, and controversies in childhood immunization,” 

Grand Rounds, Department of Pediatrics and Communicable 
Diseases 

“Health and Health Care in Michigan,” Seminars in Medicine for M3 2008 


curriculum. University of Michigan Medical School 
“Health Care Reform Proposals of the 2008 Candidates for President,” 2008 
Seminars in Medicine for M3 curriculum, University of 
Michigan Medical School 

“Health Care Platforms of the 2008 Presidential Candidates,” 2008 

expert panel convened by the Roosevelt Institution, 

University of Michigan 

“Policy Advice for the Newly Elected President,” expert panel 2008 

convened by Dean Susan Collins of the Gerald R. Ford School 
of Public Policy, University of Michigan 
“When Families Refuse Vaccines,” presentation to the Health Sciences 2009 
Scholars Program for Undergraduates, University of 
Michigan 


“Dilemmas in Development and Delivery of Vaccines,” Bioethics 2009 

Grand Rounds, University of Michigan Health System. 

“Health Care Reform in the US Under President Obama and a 2009 

Democratic Congress,” Special Guest Lecturer, Program in 
Public Policy and International Affairs, University of Michigan 
“Fresh Challenges in Development and Delivery of Vaccines,” 2009 

Grand Rounds, Department of Pediatrics and Communicable 
Diseases, University of Michigan 

“Health Care Reform: Proposals, Politics, and Prospects,” 2009 


Special Panel Symposium, Gerald R. Ford School of Public 
Policy, University of Michigan 

“What Type of Health Care Reform Would be Best for Primary Care?” 2009 
Featured Speaker for Primary Care Week, University of 
Michigan Medical School 

“Financing Development of Drugs and V accines for Neglected 2010 

Diseases,” Faculty Commentator, Gerald R. Ford School of 
Public Policy, University of Michigan 

“Making Sense of Health Policy Reform: Latest Events, Greatest 2010 
Hopes,” Grand Rounds, Department of Pediatrics and 


Davis CV 


9 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Communicable Diseases 

“(False) Summits and (True) Profits: Health Care Reform m the 2010 

United States,” Grand Rounds, Department of Internal 
Medicine 

“Public Preferences for Participation in Medical Research,” Grand 2011 
Rounds, Department of Pediatrics and Communicable 
Diseases 

“Quality of Health Care and the Affordable Care Act,” guest 2011 

speaker in Health Care Reform in the U.S., taught by 
Jill Horwitz at University of Michigan Law School 

“Policy Analysis vs Policy Advocacy,” guest speaker in HMP 615- 2011 

Introduction to Public Health Policy at University of 
Michigan School of Public Health 

“Presidents, Precedents, and Healthcare Reform in the United States,” 2012 - 
Guest Lecturer in History 234 for undergraduate students 
at University of Michigan; lead faculty: Joel Howell, MD, PhD 

“Teen Pregnancy, Infant Mortality and the Public Voice: New 2012 

Approaches to Old Problems at the Nexus of Maternal 
and Child Health,” Grand Rounds, Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, University of Michigan Health System 

“Priorities for the Health and Healthcare of Michigan’s Children: 2013 

Perspectives from Lansing,” Grand Rounds, Department 
of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of 
Michigan Health System 

“Presidential Politics for 2016: How Will Health Policy Play a Role?” 2015 
Grand Rounds, Department of Anesthesiology, University 
of Michigan Health System 

“Health Policymaking in Michigan: a View from the Inside,” Grand 2015 
Rounds, Department of Pediatrics and Communicable 
Diseases, University of Michigan Health System 

Courses and Seminars 


2000 


2003 

2006 


2004, 2008 


Primary Care Internal Medicine weekly morning report, 1997 

Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 
Internal Medicine resident journal club, faculty lead. University of 1999 - 
Chicago 

“Introduction to the Patient: Health Policy,” small group section leader, 200 1 
Year 2 curriculum. University of Michigan Medical School 
“Medical Decision-Making,” small group section leader, 200 1 - 

Year 2 curriculum. University of Michigan Medical School 
Public Policy 740, Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy: 2002 - 

“Issues in Child and Family Health Policy,” a full-semester, 

3-credit course for master’s level students 
“Threats to Successes in Child Health Policy in the United States,” 2003 - 
instructor for health policy module in the Public Policy and 
International Affairs program for minority undergraduates at 
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy, University of 


Davis CV 


10 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Michigan 

“Health Economics and Health Policy,” lead instructor for segment 
of Clinical Foundations of Medicine course. Years 1, 2, and 3 
curriculum. University of Michigan Medical School 

Public Policy 700, Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy: 

“Independent Study” for master’s level students as 3 -credit, 
full-semester course 

Public Policy 768, Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy: 

“Efforts at Health Care Reform in the United States - 
Past, Present, and Future,” a full-semester, 3-credit course for 
master’s-level students 

Public Policy 495, Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy: 

“Principles and Realities of Health Care Reform,” a full- 
semester, 3 -credit course for upper-level undergraduate 
students 

Health and Health Care Research 740 and 741, Rackham School of 
Graduate Studies, “Research on Organization, Financing, and 
Delivery of Health Care,” two full-semester 3-credit courses 
for physician-investigators-in-training 

“Containing Health Care Costs,” originator and lead instructor for 
annual M2 elective course, 6 hours of class time 

“History of Health Care Reform in the United States,” instructor for 
health policy module in the Public Policy and International 
Affairs program for minority undergraduates at Gerald R. 

Ford School of Public Policy, University of Michigan 

“Understanding and Improving the US Healthcare System,” 

lead developer and lead faculty for massive open online course 
provided on the global Coursera platform 

Public Policy 750, Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy: “Medicaid 
as an Innovative and Challenging Safety Net,” a half-semester, 
1 -credit course for master’s-level students 

Clinical Mentorship 

Internal Medicine & Pediatrics residency program, weekly 

resident continuity clinic preceptor at Canton Health Center, 
University of Michigan 

Internal Medicine & Pediatrics residency program, ad hoc 

resident continuity clinic preceptor at Canton Health Center, 
University of Michigan 

Research Mentorship 

Internal Medicine & Pediatrics residency program, 

resident research mentor. University of Michigan 
(1-3 residents mentored each academic year) 

Core Faculty, Pediatric Health Services Research Fellowship Program, 
Division of General Pediatrics, University of Michigan 


2006- 

2006- 

2008, 2010, 2012, 2013 

2008 

2008 - 

2010-2014 

2011,2013,2015 

2013 - 
2015 

July 2000 - December 2006 
January 2007 - 

July 2000 - 
July 2000 - 


Davis CV 


11 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



(1-4 fellows mentored each academic year) 

Affiliated Faculty, Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program, 
University of Michigan (1-2 fellows mentored each academic 
year) 

Core Faculty, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Clinical Scholars 
Program, University of Michigan (3-10 fellows mentored 
each academic year) 


COMMITTEE AND ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE 


Admissions Committee, Harvard Medical School 
Residency Selection Committee, Harvard Combined Program in 
Medicine and Pediatrics 

Member, Residency Selection Committee, Departments of Pediatrics 
and Communicable Diseases and Internal Medicine, 
University of Michigan 

Member, Resident Research Committee, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Michigan 

Member of Judging Panel, Annual Resident Research Day, 

St. Joseph Mercy Hospital, Ann Arbor, Michigan 
Member, 2006 Annual Meeting Planning Committee, AcademyHealth 
Lead Faculty Advisor, Medical School and Gerald R. Ford School 
of Public Policy Dual Degree MD/MPP Program, 

University of Michigan 

Pediatric Clinical Research Committee, University of Michigan 
Member, External Planning Committee, Annual National 
Immunization Conference 

Faculty Lead, Medical School coursework in Health Policy and 

Health Economics, Ml -M3 years, University of Michigan 
Member, Instructional Track Appointments, Promotions, and Tenure 
Committee, Department of Pediatrics and Communicable 
Diseases, University of Michigan 
Member, Grand Rounds Committee, Department of Pediatrics and 
Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan 
Member, Child Health Initiative Working Group, Michigan Institute 
for Clinical and Health Research (MICHR), University of 
Michigan 

Member, Search Committee, Founding Director of the Institute of 
Healthcare Policy and Innovation, University of Michigan 
Member, Harvard Medical School Alumni Council 
Co-Chair, Inaugural Events for the Institute for Healthcare Policy 
and Innovation, University of Michigan 
Member, Research and Policy Committee, Center for Healthcare 
Research and Transformation 

Member, Selection Committee for the Michigan Institute of 

Clinical and Health Research (MICHR) Mentor Award 
Member, Institute Leadership Team, Institute for Healthcare Policy 


Davis CV 


12 


July 2000 - June 2004 
July 2004 - 


1991 - 1992 
1994 - 1998 

2002 - 2006 

2003 - 2006 

2004 - 2005 

2005 - 2006 
2006- 

2008 

2008 - 2009 
2008 - 
2010-2014 

2010-2012 

2010-2011 

2010-2011 

2011 -2014 

2012- 2013 

2012 - 
2013 - 

2013- 

Last updated: 10/1/2015 



and Innovation, University of Michigan 
Member, Search Committee for Associate Dean for Clinical and 
Translational Research, University of Michigan 


EXTRAMURAL INVITED PRESENTATIONS 


“Methodological issues in the application of quality -adjusted 

life-years to interventions regarding children.” Presentation 
at Environmental Protection Agency of white paper submitted 
as background for the Child Health Evaluation Handbook, 
Washington, DC. 

“Vaccine shortages and vaccine economics.” Presented at the 
National Immunization Program, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA. 

“Increasing costs of public-sector purchase of childhood vaccines.” 
Presented at the National Immunization Program, 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 

Atlanta, GA. 

“Insurance transitions for children and adults.” Grand Rounds, 
Harvard Combined Program in Internal Medicine and 
Pediatrics, Boston, MA. 

“Adult vaccine benefit coverage in employer-sponsored health plans.” 
Presented at the National Immunization Program, 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA. 

“Insurance coverage of vaccines.” Presented to the National Vaccine 
Advisory Committee, Washington, DC. 

“Considering the costs of vaccines.” Presented at the National 
Immunization Program, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, GA. 

“Old challenges, new opportunities in insurance coverage for 
adult vaccines.” Presented to the National Vaccine 
Advisory Committee, Washington, DC. 

“Addressing children’s underinsurance through policy-relevant 

research.” Presented within Pediatric Academic Societies 
Topic Symposium, “From Health Services Research to 
Public Policy,” at annual PAS meeting, San Francisco, CA. 

“Counting the costs of childhood obesity.” Grand Rounds, 

Department of Pediatrics, Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, MI. 

“Vaccine financing strategies and industry research opportunities: 
the global perspective.” Plenary presentation at the World 
Vaccine Congress, Washington, DC. 

“Innovation Bridge: New vaccines, new partnerships.” Plenary 
presentation at the Developing Country Vaccine 
Manufacturers Network 10 th annual meeting, Beijing, China. 

“Health care reform in the United States.” Featured speaker at 
town hall meeting, Northville, MI. 

“Opportunities for health care reform during the Obama 


2015 

June 2001 

March 2002 
March 2003 

June 2003 

March 2004 

February 2005 
March 2005 

November 2005 

May 2006 

October 2006 
April 2009 

September 2009 

October 2009 
November 2009 


Davis CV 


13 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



administration.” Featured speaker at quarterly meeting of the 
Washtenaw County Medical Society, Ann Arbor, MI. 

“A critical examination of legislative options for health care reform.” 
Department of Internal Medicine Journal Club, Saint Joseph 
Mercy Health System, Aim Arbor, MI. 

'‘Making sense of health policy reform.” Grand Rounds, Department 
of Internal Medicine, Saint Joseph Mercy Hospital, 

Ann Arbor, MI. 

“Fresh challenges in the development and delivery of vaccines.” 
Grand Rounds, Department of Pediatrics, Beaumont 
Hospital, Royal Oak, MI. 

“Illuminating the global R&D pipeline for prophylactic vaccines.” 
Featured speaker, special presentation. International 
AIDS Vaccine Initiative, New York, NY. 

“Understanding challenges and opportunities in research and 

development of prophylactic vaccines.” Featured guest 
lecturer, Bloomberg School of Public Health, The Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD. 

“Characterizing and understanding the R&D pipeline for prophylactic 
vaccines.” Presented at National Center for Influenza 
and Respiratory Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, GA. 

“National Voices Project.” Featured panel presenter at America 
Healing national meeting of grantees of the W.K. Kellogg 
Foundation, Asheville, NC. 

“Failings in pediatrics (and what health services research can do 

about them).” Featured faculty presenter, 1 st Annual Child 
Health Services Research Symposium, Indiana University 
Purdue University at Indianapolis, Indianapolis, IN. 

“Addressing significant unmet needs through world class vaccine 
pipelines.” Featured plenary speaker. World Vaccine 
Congress, Lyon, France. 

“Challenges and opportunities in research, development and financing 
of prophylactic vaccines.” Featured guest lecturer, 

Bloomberg School of Public Health, The Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD. 

“Challenges and successes in new vaccine development for adults.” 
Grand Rounds speaker. Saint John’s Hospital, Detroit, MI. 

“National Voices Project.” Featured panel presenter at America 
Healing national meeting of grantees of the W.K. Kellogg 
Foundation, Asheville, NC. 

“Clinical implications of healthcare reform for academic medical 
centers.” Association of Academic Internal Medicine 
annual meeting. New Orleans, LA. 

“Making progress but losing ground: the quicksand of infant mortality 
in the United States.” Snyder Memorial Lecture, Swarthmore 
College, Swarthmore, PA. 

“The Million Hearts Initiative: Can the Affordable Care Act 


Davis CV 


14 


December 2009 
March 2010 
June 2010 
December 2010 
March 2011 

April 2011 

May 2011 
September 2011 

October 2011 
February 2012 

October 2012 
April 2013 

October 2013 

March 2014 

May 2014 

Last updated: 10/1/2015 



deliver?” Million Hearts Initiative Workshop, Okemos, MI. 

“What if we asked the public?” Grand Rounds presentation. Royal 
Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia. 

“Infant mortality as a state health priority and key index of 
population health in Michigan.” Health Policy guest 
lecturer, Oakland University William Beaumont Medical 
School, Troy, MI. 

“Health services research and impact of the field of infant mortality 
research.” Keynote speaker, annual meeting of the Midwest 
Society of Pediatric Research, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, 

OH. 

“What if we asked the public? Measuring attitudes, influencing policy.” 
Grand Rounds presentation. Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA. 

“From affecting to effecting health policy: focusing on population 
health as a physician, researcher, and government official.” 
Grand Rounds presentation, Brigham & Women’s Hospital, 
Boston, MA. 

“Importance of addressing neonatal abstinence syndrome in Michigan.” 
Keynote address for statewide symposium: NAS — Primary 
and Secondary Prevention; a Team Approach. Okemos, MI. 

“In tlie belly of the policy beast: Data, debate, and the value of the 

academic voice.” PolicyLab Seminar presentation. Children’s 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA. 

“MHA Keystone Pain Management: Why, who, what, how?” 

Keynote address, Michigan Health and Hospitals Association 
Keystone Symposium, Dearborn, MI. 


SELECTED OTHER PRESENTATIONS 


“Parental depression as a determinant of undervaccination among 
preschool-aged children.” Plenary presentation, 

Robert Wood Johnson Clinical Scholars Program 
annual meeting. Ft. Lauderdale, FL. 

“The future of childhood vaccine costs in the public sector.” 
Platform presentation, Robert Wood Johnson Clinical 
Scholars Program annual meeting. Ft. Lauderdale, FL. 

“Cost-effectiveness analysis of immunization strategies regarding 
smallpox bioterrorism.” Platform presentation, 

Society of General Internal Medicine annual meeting, 
Atlanta, GA. 

“State-level demographic, economic, and political factors associated 
with children’s vaccination rates.” Oral presentation, 
AcademyHealth annual meeting, Washington, D.C. 

“Factors associated with transitions in children’s health insurance.” 
Platform presentation. Pediatric Academic Societies 
annual meeting, Seattle, WA. 

“Projected economic impact of childhood vaccine shortages.” 


August 2014 
October 2014 

October 2014 

January 2015 
January 2015 

May 2015 
May 2015 
May 2015 

November 2000 

November 2001 
May 2002 

June 2002 
May 2003 
May 2003 


Davis CV 


15 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Platform presentation. Pediatric Academic Societies 
annual meeting, Seattle, WA. 

"Decline in varicella-related hospitalizations and expenditures after 
introduction of varicella vaccine.” Platform presentation. 
Pediatric Academic Societies annual meeting, 

San Francisco, CA. 

“State school and daycare entry laws associated with higher varicella 
immunization rates.” Platform presentation. Pediatric 
Academic Societies annual meeting, San Francisco, CA. 

“Healthcare utilization and expenditures associated with adults' 

transitions in health insurance status.” Platform presentation. 
Society of General Internal Medicine annual meeting, 
Chicago, IL. 

“Preferences and tradeoffs for preventive services in health plans.” 
Platform presentation. Society of General Internal Medicine 
annual meeting, Chicago, IL. 

"Attitudes of medical subspecialists regarding influenza vaccine." 

Oral presentation. National Immunization Conference, 
Nashville, TN. 

“Benefits coverage for adult vaccines in employer-sponsored 

health plans.” Oral presentation. National Immunization 
Conference, Nashville, TN. 

“Assessing the potential effect of programmatic changes in Medicaid 
and SCHIP on children’s uninsured rates.” Research panel 
presentation at the 2005 annual Child Health Services 
Research Meeting of AcademyHealth, Washington, D.C. 

“How many successes and how many failures? Vaccine development 
in the United States, 1995-2008.” Oral presentation. 

National Immunization Conference, Dallas, TX. 

“How many successes and how many failures? Vaccine development 
in the United States, 1995-2008.” Oral symposium 
presentation. Pediatric Academic Societies annual meeting, 
Baltimore, MD. 

“Implications of national health care reform for the University of 
Michigan Health System.” Presentation to the Regents of 
the University of Michigan. 

“Implications of racial/ethnic diversity for health in the United 

States — 2030.” Featured speaker. Society 2030 meeting. 
Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan. 

“Focusing on passion, difference, and service.” Keynote presentation 
at graduation of the Michigan Health Sciences Summer 
Institute / Undergraduate Research Academy, University 
of Michigan. 


May 2004 

May 2004 
May 2004 

May 2004 
March 2004 
March 2004 
June 2005 

March 2009 
May 2009 

May 2010 
June 2011 
August 2014 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Davis CV 


16 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Peer-Reviewed Publications 


1) Davis FB, Bias SD, Davis MM, Davis PJ. Analogue-specific action in vitro of atrial natriuretic factor 
on human red blood cell Ca2+-ATPase activity. Hypertension. 1988;12:428-433. 

2) Davis MM, Andreae M, Freed GL. Physicians’ early challenges related to the pneumococcal 
conjugate vaccine. Ambul Pediatr 2001;1:302-305. 

3) Kemper AR, Davis MM, Freed GL. Expected adverse events in a smallpox vaccination campaign for 
children and young adults. EffClinPract 2002;5:84-90. 

4) Freed GL, Davis MM, Andreae MC, Bass S, Weinblatt H. Reimbursement for Prevnar: A modern- 
day version of Flercules and the Hydra. Pediatrics. 2002;1 10:399-400. 

5) Davis MM, McMahon SR, Santoli JM, Schwartz B, Clark SJ. A national survey of physician 
practices regarding influenza vaccine. J Gen Intern Med 2002;17:670-676. 

6) Cabana MD, Aiken KD, Davis MM, Freed GL, Clark SJ. Combined effect of changes in guideline 
recommendations and immunization financing policy on nursery immunizations. Ambul Pediatr 
2002;2:367-374. 

7) Davis MM, Zimmerman JL, Wheeler JRC, Freed GL. The costs of childhood vaccine purchase in 
the public sector: past trends, future expectations. Am J Public Health. 2002;92: 1982-1987. 

8) Freed GL, Davis MM, Clark SJ. Variation in public and private supply of pneumococcal conjugate 
vaccine during a shortage. JAMA. 2003;289:575-578. 

9) Kemper AR, Davis MM. Under scrutiny: smallpox vaccine recommendations. Expert Opin 
Pharmacother. 2003;4:1207-1214. 

10) Davis MM, Ndiaye SM, Freed GL, Kim CS, Clark SJ. Influence of insurance status and vaccine cost 
on physicians’ administration of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine. Pediatrics. 2003;1 12:521-526. 

1 1) Davis MM, Ndiaye SM, Freed GL, Clark SJ. One-year uptake of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine: a 
national survey of family physicians and pediatricians. J Am Board Fam Pract. 2003;16:363-371. 

12) Cabana MD, Rand C, Slish K, Nan B, Davis MM, Clark N. Pediatrician self-efficacy for counseling 
parents of asthmatic children to quit smoking. Pediatrics. 2004;1 13:78-81. 

13) Davis MM, Wortley PM, Ndiaye SM, Woods MG, Clark SJ. Availability of influenza vaccine 
among medical subspecialty practices: a national survey. Am JPrevMed. 2004;26:307-310. 

14) Pollack HA, Dombkowski KJ, Zimmerman JB, Davis MM, Cowan AE, Wheeler JRC, Hillemeier 
AC, Freed GL. Emergency department use among Michigan children with special health care needs: 
an introductory study. Health Serv Res. 2004;39:665-692. 

15) Aiken KD, Freed GL, Davis MM. When insurance status isn’t static: insurance transitions for low- 
income children and implications for health and health care. Ambul Pediatr 2004;4:237-243. 

16) Flynn HA, Davis MM, Marcus SM, Cunningham R, Blow FC. Rates of maternal depression in 
pediatric emergency department and relationship to child service utilization. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 
2004;26:316-322. 

17) Davis MM, Upston AM. State legislator gender and other characteristics associated with sponsorship 
of child health bills. Ambul Pediatr 2004;4:295-302. 

18) Jee SH, Davis MM. Factors associated with variations in parental social support in primary care 
pediatric settings. Ambul Pediatr 2004;4:316-322. 

19) Davis MM, Patel MS, Gebremariam A. Decline in varicella-related hospitalizations and expenditures 
for children and adults after introduction of varicella vaccine in the United States. Pediatrics. 
2004;114:786-792. 

20) Odetola O, Clark SJ, Freed GL, Bratton SL, Davis MM. A national survey of the distribution of 
pediatric critical care resources in the United States. Pediatrics. 2005; 1 15:382-386. 

21) Kemper AR, Cowan AE, Ching PL, Davis MM, Kennedy E, Clark SJ, Freed GL. Hospital decision- 
making regarding the smallpox pre-event vaccination program. Biosecur Bioterr. 2005;3:23-30. 


Davis CV 


17 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



22) Davis MM, Gaglia M. Association of daycare and school entry vaccination requirements with 
varicella immunization rates. Vaccine. 2005;23:3053-3060. 

23) Davis MM, Fant KE. Coverage of vaccines in private health plans: what does the public prefer? 
Health Aff. 2005;24:770-779. 

24) Davis MM, Flalasyamani LK, Sneller V-P, Bishop KR, Clark SJ. Provider response to different 
formats of the adult immunization schedule. Am J PrevMed. 2005;29:34-40. 

25) Odetola O. Miller W, Davis M, Bratton S. The relationship between the location of pediatric 
intensive care unit facilities and child death from trauma: a county-level ecologic study. J Pediatr. 
2005;147:74-77. 

26) Yoon EY, Davis MM, Van Cleave J, Maheshwari S, Cabana MD. Factors associated with non- 
attendance at pediatric subspecialty asthma clinics. J Asthma. 2005;42:555-559. 

27) Gopal S, Davis MM. Improving delivery of influenza vaccine to nonelderly persons with 
cardiovascular disease, with and without sufficient national supply of vaccine: a decision analysis. 
Hum Vaccin. 2005;1:217-223. 

28) Odetola FO, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Growth, development and failure to thrive: Factors that underlie 
the availability of pediatric critical care facilities in the United States. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2006; 
7:70-73. 

29) Davis MM, Slish K, Chao C, Cabana MD. National trends in bariatric surgery, 1996-2002. Arch 
Surg. 2006;141:71-74. 

30) Yoon EY, Davis MM, El-Essawi H, Cabana MD. FDA labeling status of pediatric medications. Clin 
Pediatr (Philo)). 2006;45:75-78. 

3 1) Lee JM, Davis MM, Clark SJ, Hofer TJ, Kemper AR. Estimated cost-effectiveness of growth 
hormone therapy for idiopathic short stature. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2006; 160:263-269. 

32) Patel MS, Davis MM. Could a federal program promoting influenza vaccination among elders be 
cost-effective? PrevMed. 2006;42:240-246. 

33) Gaglia MA, Davis MM. States’ emergency orders regarding the 2004-05 influenza vaccine shortage. 
Hum Vaccin. 2006;2:34-37. 

34) Davis MM. Successes and remaining challenges after 10 years of varicella vaccination in the United 
States. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2006;5:295-302. 

35) Cowan AE, Winston CA, Davis MM, Wortley PM, Clark SJ. Influenza vaccination status and 
influenza-related attitudes and practices among US physicians. Am J Infect Control. 2006;34: 164- 
169. 

36) Jee SH, Barth RP, Szilagyi MA, Szilagyi PG, Aida M, Davis MM. Factors associated with chronic 
conditions among children in foster care. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 2006;17:328-341. 

37) Kemper AR, Dombkowski KJ, Menon RK, Davis MM. Trends in diabetes mellitus among privately 
insured children, 1998-2002. Ambul Pediatr. 2006;6:178-181. 

38) Odetola F, Tilford JM, Davis MM. Variation in the use of intracranial pressure monitoring and 
mortality in critically ill children with meningitis in the United States. Pediatrics. 2006;1 17: 1893- 
1900. 

39) Flynn HA, Cain SA, O’Mahen HA, Davis MM. Detection of maternal alcohol use problems in the 
pediatric emergency department. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2006;30: 1 160-1164. 

40) Mmeje O, Davis MM. Will coverage for child and adolescent immunizations be mandated in 
insurance plans in 2006? Lessons learned from the Newborns and Mothers Health Protection Act of 
1996. Pediatrics. 2006;118:388-392. 

41) Davis MM, Broder KR, Cowan AE, Mijalski C, Kretsinger K, Stokley S, Clark SJ. Physician 
attitudes and preferences regarding new combined tetanus-diphtheria-acellular pertussis vaccines for 
adolescents in the United States. AmerJPrevMed. 2006;31:176-180. 

42) Patel UD, Davis MM. Physicians’ attitudes and practices regarding adherence to medical regimens 


Davis CV 


18 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



by patients with chronic illness. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2006;45:439-45. 

43) Patel UD. Davis MM. Falling into the doughnut hole: drug spending among beneficiaries with end- 
stage renal disease under Medicare Part D plans. Am J Nephrol. 2006; 17: 2546-2553. 

44) Gurney JG, McPheeters ML, Davis MM. Flealth conditions and health care utilization among 
children with and without autism: National Survey of Children’s Health. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2006;160:825-830. 

45) Dombkowski KJ, Davis MM, Cohn L, Clark SJ. Potential for improving influenza vaccination rates 
among children with asthma. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2006;160:966-971. 

46) Davis MM, Taubert K, Benin AL, Brown DW, Mensah GA, Baddour LM, Dunbar S, Krumholz HM. 
Influenza vaccination as secondary prevention for cardiovascular disease. Circulation. 
2006;114:1549-1553. 

47) Van Cleave J, Davis MM. Bullying behaviors and children with special health care needs in a 
national sample. Pediatrics. 2006;118:1212-1219. 

48) Okumura M, Campbell A, Nasr S, Davis MM. Inpatient health care utilization among adult survivors 
of chronic childhood illnesses in the United States. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2006;160:1054-1060. 

49) Lee JM, Okumura M, Davis MM, Herman WH, Gurney JG. Prevalence and determinants of insulin 
resistance among U.S. adolescents: a population based study. Diabetes Care. 2006;29:2427-2432. 

50) Clark SJ, Adolphe S, Davis MM, Cowan AE, Kretsinger K. Attitudes of U.S. obstetricians toward a 
combined tetanus-diphtheria-acellular pertussis vaccine for adults. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol. 
2006;2006:1-5. 

5 1) Odetola FO, Shanley TP, Gurney JG, Clark SJ, Dechert RE, Freed GL, Davis MM. Characteristics 
and outcomes of inter-hospital transfers from Level II to Level I pediatric intensive care units. 

Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2006;7:536-540. 

52) Clark SJ, Cowan AE, Stokley S, Bilukha O, Davis MM. Physician perspectives to inform a new 
meningococcal conjugate vaccine (MCV4) recommendation. J Adolesc Health. 2006;39:850-855. 

53) Dempsey AF, Davis MM. Overcoming barriers to adherence to HPV vaccination recommendations. 
Am J Manag Care. 2006;12:S484-S491. 

54) Laroche HH, Hofer TP, Davis MM. Adult fat intake associated with the presence of children in 
households: findings from NHANES III. J Am Board Fam Med. 2007;20:9-15. 

55) Davis MM, Patel MS, Halasyamani L. Variation in estimated Medicare prescription drug plan costs 
and affordability for beneficiaries living in different states. J Gen Intern Med. 2007;22:257-263. 

56) Davis MM, Marin M, Cowan AE, Guris D, Clark SJ. Physician attitudes regarding breakthrough 
varicella disease and apotential second dose of varicella vaccine. Pediatrics. 2007;119:258-264. 

57) Lee JM, Davis MM, Clark SJ, Kemper AR. Threshold of evaluation for short stature in a pediatric 
specialty clinic: differences between boys versus girls? J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2007; 20:21-26. 

58) Woolford SJ, Clark SJ, Lumeng JC, Williams DR, Davis MM. Maternal perspectives on growth and 
nutrition counseling provided at preschool well-child visits. J Natl Med Assoc. 2007;99:153-158. 

59) Davis MM, Halasyamani LK. Conflicting measures of hospital quality: ratings from ‘Hospital 
Compare’ versus ‘Best Hospitals.’ JHospMed. 2007;2:128-134. 

60) Davis MM, Kretsinger K, Cowan AE, Stokely S, Clark SJ. New combined tetanus-diphtheria- 
acellular pertussis vaccines for adults: primary' care physician attitudes and preferences. Hum Vaccin. 
2007; published online, available at: 

http://www.iandesbioscience.com/ioumals/vaccines/abstract.php?id :; 4307 . 

61) Yoon EY, Dombkowski KJ, Rocchini A, Lin JJ, Davis MM. Off-label utilization of antihypertensive 
medications in children. Ambul Pediatr. 2007;7:299-303. 

62) Woolford S, Clark S J, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Inpatient hospital charges associated with 
obesity' as a secondary' diagnosis in children. Obesity. 2007;15: 1895-1901. 

63) Okumura MJ, McPheeters M, Davis MM. State and national estimates of insurance coverage and 


Davis CV 


19 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



health care utilization for adolescents with chronic conditions from the National Survey of Children’s 
Health Survey, 2003. J Adolesc Health. 2007;41:343-349. 

64) Lee JM. Okumura MJ. Freed GL, Menon RK, Davis MM. Trends in hospitalizations for diabetes 
among children and young adults - United States, 1993-2004. Diabetes Care. 2007;30:3035-3039. 

65) Davis MM, Gance- Cleveland B. Hassink S, Johnson R. Paradis G, Resnicow K. Recommendations 
for prevention of childhood obesity. Pediatrics. 2007;120:S229-S253. 

66) Van Cleave J, Heisler M, DeVries JM, Joiner TA, Davis MM. Discussion of illness during well- 
child visits with parents of children with and without special health care needs. Arch Pediatr Adolesc 
Med. 2007;161:1170-1175. 

67) Laroche HH, Davis MM, Forman J, Palmisano G, Heisler M. What about the children? The 
experience of families involved in an adult-focused diabetes intervention. Public Health Nutr. 2007; 
published online, available at: 

http://joumaIs.cambridge.org/download.phE?file= 5 %2FPHN%2FS1368980007000791a.pd.f&code~ldf 
0b2009 1 7 a 3 4cj d I e 3 a i a9fe I 45t>0df. 

68) Odetola FO, Rosenberg AL, Davis MM, Clark SJ, Dechert RE, Shanley TP. Do outcomes vary 
according to the source of admission to the pediatric intensive care unit? Pediatr Crit Care Med. 
2008;9:20-25. 

69) Schilling PL, Davis MM, Albanese CT, Dutta S, Morton J. National trends in adolescent bariatric 
surgical procedures and implications for surgical centers of excellence. Bull Am Coll Surg. 
2008;206:1-12. 

70) Lee JM, Davis MM, Menon RK, Freed GL. The geographic distribution of childhood diabetes and 
obesity to the supply of pediatric endocrinologists in the US. J Pediatr. 2008; 152;33 1-336. 

71) Woolford SJ, Davis MM, Gebremariam A, Strecher V. Physicians’ perspectives on increasing the 
use of BMI charts for young children. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2008;47:573-577. 

72) Davis MM, Wortley PM, Ndiaye SM, Cowan AE, Osta AD, Clark SJ. Vaccinating high-risk non- 
elderly adults against influenza: a national survey of subspecialists. Human Vaccines. 2008;4:229- 
233. 

73) Zivin K, McCammon RJ, Davis MM, Halasyamani LK, Kales HC. Increases in Medicare 
prescription drug plan costs attributable to psychotropic medications. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 
2008;16:674-685. 

74) Dempsey AF, Cowan AE, Stokley S, Messonnier M, Clark SJ, Davis MM. The role of economic 
information in decision-making by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Vaccine. 
2008;26:5389-5392. 

75) Laroche HH, Heisler M, Forman J, Anderson M, Davis MM. When adults with diabetes attempt to 
drink less soda: resulting adult-child interactions and household changes. J Natl Med Assoc. 
2008;100:1004-1011. 

76) Caskey RN, Davis MM. Differences in end-of-Iife hospital care for children, associated with age, 
transfer status, and insurance coverage for children. J Hosp Med 2008;3(5):376-83. 

77) Tarini BA, Singer DC, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Parental concerns about genetic disease risk: the effects 
of family history and genetic test results. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2008;162:1079-1083. 

78) Harari N, Davis MM, Heisler M. Strangers in a strange land: health care experiences for recent 
Latino immigrants in Midwest communities. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 2008;19: 1350-1367. 

79) Davis MM, McGonagle K, Schoeni RF, Stafford F. Relative associations of parental and 
grandparental obesity with risk of childhood overweight: implications for primary care practice. J 
Am Board Fam Med. 2008;21:549-554. 

80) Patel MS, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Herpes zoster-related hospitalizations and expenditures 
before and after introduction of varicella vaccine in the United States. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
2008;29:1157-1163. 


Davis CV 


20 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



81) Danziger S, Davis MM, Orzol S, Pollack HA. Health insurance and access to care among welfare 
leavers. Inquiry. 2008;45:184-197. 

82) Van Cleave J, Davis MM. Preventive care utilization among children with and without special health 
care needs: associations with unmet need. Ambul Pediatr. 2008;8:305-3 1 1 . 

83) Okumura MJ. Heisler M, Davis MM, Cabana MD, Demonner S, Kerr EA. Comfort of general 
internists and general pediatricians in providing care for young adults with chronic illnesses of 
childhood. J Gen Intern Med. 2008;23:1621-1627. 

84) Hoilette LK, Clark S J, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Usual source of care and unmet need among 
vulnerable children: 1998-2006. Pediatrics. 2009;123:e214-e219. 

85) Yoon EY, Davis MM, Rocchini A, Kershaw D, Freed GL. Medical management of children with 
primary hypertension by pediatric subspecialists. Pediatr Nephrol. 2009;24:147-153. 

86) Macy ML, Stanley RM, Lozon MM, Sasson C, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Trends in high- 
turnover stays among children hospitalized in the United States - 1993-2003. Pediatrics. 
2009;123:996-1002. 

87) Woolford SJ, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Persistent gap of incremental charges for 
obesity as a secondary diagnosis in common pediatric hospitalizations. J Hosp Med. 2009;4: 149- 
156. 

88) Odetola F, Davis MM, Cohn L, Clark SJ. Interhospital transfer of critically ill and injured children: 
an evaluation of transfer patterns, resource utilization, and clinical outcomes. JHosp Med. 
2009;4:164-170. 

89) Hassan F, Lewis TC, Davis MM, Gebremariam A, Dombkowski KJ. Hospital utilization and charges 
among children with influenza, 2003. Amer J Prev Med. 2009;36:292-296. 

90) Dempsey AF, Espinosa C, Davis MM. Unintended vaccination of pregnant adolescents: Estimating 
the scope of the problem and the impact of different pregnancy testing strategies. Vaccine. 
2009;27:3536-3543. 

91) Yoon EY, Davis MM, Freed GL, Clark SJ. Formulary coverage for lipid-lowering drugs 
recommended for children. Clinical Pediatrics. 2009;48:609-613. 

92) Lee JM, Gebremariam A, Card-Higginson P, Shaw JL, Thompson JW, Davis MM. Poor 
performance of body mass index as a marker for hypercholesterolemia in children and adolescents. 
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2009; 1 63 : 7 1 6-723. 

93) Tarini BA, Singer DC, Butchart AT, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Parents’ interest in predictive genetic 
testing for their children when a disease has no effective treatment. Pediatrics. 2009;124:e432-e438. 

94) Patel MS, Lypson ML, Davis MM. Medical student perceptions of education in health care systems. 
Acad Med. 2009;84:1301-1306. 

95) Dempsey AF, Singer DC, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Parents’ views on three shot-related visits: 
Implications for use of adolescent vaccines like human papillomavirus vaccine. Acad Pediatrics. 
2009;9:348-352. 

96) Yoon EY, Davis MM, Kershaw, D, Clark SJ. Formulary coverage for antihypertensive drugs used in 
children. Am J P harm Benefits. 2009;1:145-149. 

97) Dempsey AF, Singer DC, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Adolescent preventive healthcare: what do parents 
want? J Pediatr. 2009;155:689-694. 

98) Laroche HH, Davis MM, Forman J, Palmisano G, Reisinger HS, Tannas C, Spencer M, Heisler M. 
Children’s roles in parents’ diabetes self-management. Amer Jour Prev Med. 2009;37(6S1):S251- 
S261. 

99) Davis RN, Caldwell C, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Depressive symptoms in non-resident African 
American fathers and involvement with their sons. Pediatrics. 2009;124: 161 1-1618. 

100) Lee JM, Pilli S, Gebremariam A, Keirns CC, Davis MM, Vijan S, Freed GL, Herman WH, Gurney 
JG. Getting heavier, younger: trajectories of obesity over the life course. IntJ Obes (Lond). 2009 


Davis CV 


21 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Dec 1 . [Epub ahead of print] 

101) Woolford SJ, Clark SJ, Ahmed AR, Davis MM. Feasibility and acceptability of a one-page tool to 
help physicians assess and discuss obesity with parents of preschoolers. Clin Pediatr. 2009;48:954- 
959. 

102) Lee JM. Davis MM, Woolford SJ, Gurney JG. Waist circumference percentile thresholds for 
identifying adolescents with insulin resistance in clinical practice. Pediatric Diabetes. 2009; 10: 336- 
342. 

103) Hollingsworth JM, Davis MM, West BT, Wolf JS Jr, Hollenbeck BK. Trends in medical expulsive 
therapy use for urinary stone disease in U.S. emergency departments. Urology. 2009;74: 1206-1210. 

104) Davis MM, Butchart AT, Coleman MS, Singer DC, Wheeler JRC, Pok A, Freed GL. The expanding 
vaccine development pipeline, 1995-2008. Vaccine. 2010;28:1353-1356. 

105) Lancaster CA, Gold KJ, Flynn HA, Yoo H, Marcus SM, Davis MM. Risk factors for depressive 
symptoms during pregnancy: a systematic review. Amer Jour Obstet Gyn. 2010;5- 14. 

106) Schilling P, Campbell D, Englesbe M, Davis MM. A comparison of in-hospital mortality risk 
conferred by high hospital occupancy, differences in nurse staffing levels, weekend admission, and 
seasonal influenza. Medical Care. 2010;48:224-232. 

107) Freed GL, Clark SJ, Butchart AT, Singer DC, Davis MM. Parental vaccine safety concerns in 2009. 
Pediatrics. 2010;125:654-659. 

108) Macy ML, Kim CS, Sasson C, Lozon MM, Davis MM. Pediatric observation units in the United 
States: a systematic review. Jour Hosp Med. 2010;5:172-182. 

109) Okumura MJ, Kerr EA, Cabana MD, Davis MM, Demonner S, Heisler M. Physician views on 
barriers to primary care for young adults with childhood-onset chronic disease. Pediatrics. 
2010;125:e748-e754. 

110) Freed GL, Dunham KM, Clark SJ, Davis MM, on behalf of the Research Advisory Committee of the 
American Board of Pediatrics. Perspectives and preferences regarding physician selection and board 
certification among the general public. J Pediatr. 2010;156;841-845. 

111) Tarini BA, Goldenberg A, Singer D, Clark SJ, Butchart A, Davis MM. Not without my permission: 
parents’ willingness to permit use of newborn screening samples for research. Public Health 
Genomics. 2010;13:125-130. 

112) Lancaster CA, Flynn HA, Johnson TRB, Marcus SM, Davis MM. Peripartum length of stay for 
women with depressive symptoms during pregnancy. Jour Women ’s Health. 2010;19:3 1-37. 

113) Woolford SJ, Clark SJ, Gebremariam A, Davis MM, Freed GL. To cut or not to cut: physicians’ 
perspectives on referring adolescents for bariatric surgery. Obes Surg. 2010;20:937-942. 

1 14) Sussman J, Halasyamani LK, Davis MM. Hospitals during recession and recovery: vulnerable 
institutions and quality at risk. Jour Hosp Med. 2010;5:302-305. 

1 15) Odetola FO, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Comorbid illnesses among critically ill hospitalized 
children: impact on hospital resource use and mortality, 1997-2006. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2010; 
11:457-463. 

1 16) Woolford SJ, Clark SJ, Gebremariam A, Davis MM, Freed GL. Physicians’ perspectives on referring 
obese adolescents to pediatric multidisciplinary weight management programs. Clin Pediatr. 
2010;49:871-875. 

117) Macy ML, Stanley RM, Sasson C, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. High turnover stays for pediatric 
asthma in the United States: analysis of the 2006 Kids’ Inpatient Database. Med Care. 2010;48:827- 
833. 

118) Lee JM, Gebremariam A, Davis MM, Kim C. Trends in hospitalizations for diabetes over the life 
course. Jour Women’s Health. 2010;19:2033-2042. 

119) Patel MS, Davis MM, Lypson ML. Advancing medical education by teaching health policy. N Engl 
Jour Med. 2011;364:695-697. 


Davis CV 


22 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



120) Eisenberg D, Freed GL. Davis MM, Singer D, Prosser LA. Valuing health at different ages: evidence 
from a nationally representative survey in the US. Applied Health Economics & Health 

Policy. 2011;9:149-156. 

121) Yoon EY, Clark SJ, Singer DC, Butchart AT, Davis MM. Parental preferences for FDA-approved 
medications prescribed for their children. Clin Pediatr. 2011 ;50:208-2 14. 

122) Davis N, Davis MM, Freed GL, Clark SJ. Fathers’ depression related to positive and negative 
parenting behaviors with one-year-old children. Pediatrics. 2011;127:612-618. 

123) Freed GL, Clark SJ, Butchart AT, Singer DC, Davis MM. Sources and perceived credibility of 
vaccine safety information for parents. Pediatrics. 2011;127(suppl):S107-S112. 

124) Palladino CL, Flynn HA, Richardson C, Marcus SM, Johnson TRB, Davis MM. Lengthened pre- 
delivery stay and antepartum complications in women with depressive symptoms during pregnancy. 
Jour Women’s Health. 2011;20:953-962. 

125) Benneyworth BD, Shanley TS, Odetola F, Davis MM. Inpatient health care utilization for children 
dependent on long-term mechanical ventilation - United States, 2000-2006. Pediatrics. 

201 1;127:©1533 -e!54i. 

126) Macy ML, Davis MM, Clark SJ, Stanley R. Parental health literacy and asthma education delivery 
during a visit to a community-based pediatric emergency department: a pilot study. Pediatr Emerg 
Care. 2011;27:469-474. 

127) Palladino CL, Fedock GL, Forman JH, Davis MM, Henshaw E, Flynn HA. OB CARES - The 
obstetric clinic and resources study: providers’ perceptions of addressing perinatal depression — a 
qualitative study. Gen Hasp Psych. 2011;33:267-278. 

128) Zickafoose JS, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ, Davis MM. Medical home disparities between children 
with public and private insurance. Academic Peds. 2011;11:305-310. 

129) Davis MM, Walter JK. Equality in quality in the era of the Affordable Care Act. JAMA. 
2011:306:872-873. 

130) Hassan F, Davis MM, Chervin RD. No independent association between insufficient sleep and 
childhood obesity in the National Survey of Children’s Health. J Clin Sleep Med. 2011;7:153-157. 

131) Dempsey AF, Schaffer S, Singer D, Butchart A, Davis MM, Freed GL. Alternative vaccination 
schedule preferences among parents of young children. Pediatrics. 201 1;128:848-856. 

132) Davis MM, Butchart AT, Wheeler JRC, Coleman MS, Singer DC, Freed GL. Failure-to-success 
ratios, transition probabilities and phase lengths for prophylactic vaccines versus other 
pharmaceuticals in the development pipeline. Vaccine. 201 1;29: 94 14-94 16. 

133) Dayoub EJ, Davis MM. Relationship of therapeutic cancer vaccine development to population 
disease burden and five-year survival. Human Vaccines. 201 1;7: 1 124-1129. 

134) Odetola FO, Clark SJ, Lamarand KE, Davis MM, Garton HJ. Intracranial pressure monitoring in 
childhood meningitis with coma: a national survey of neurosurgeons in the United States. Pediatr 
Crit Care Med. 201 l;12:e350-356. 

135) Espinosa CM, Davis MM, Gilsdorf JR. Anaerobic osteomyelitis in children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 
2011;30:422-423. 

136) Zickafoose JS, Benneyworth B, Riebschleger MP, Espinosa CE, Davis MM. Hospitalizations for 
intussusception before and after re-introduction of rotavirus vaccine in the United States. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med. 20 12; 1 66:350-355. 

137) Myrvik MP, Campbell AD, Davis MM, Butcher JL. Impact of psychiatric diagnoses on hospital 
length of stay in children with sickle cell anemia. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012;58:239-243. 

138) Sun GH, Davis MM. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010: impact on 
otolaryngology practice and research. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2012 Jan 26. [Epub ahead of 
print] 

139) Abir M, Choi H, Cooke CR, Wang SC, Davis MM. Effect of a mass casualty incident: clinical 


Davis CV 


23 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



outcomes and hospital charges for casualty patients versus concurrent inpatients. Acad EmergMed 
2012;19:280-286. 

140) Zickafoose JS, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Medical home disparities for children by insurance type 
and state of residence. Matern Child Health Jour. 2012;16 Suppl 1:S 178-S 187. 

141) Patrick SW. Schumacher RE, Benneyworth BD, Krans EE, McAllister JM, Davis MM. Neonatal 
abstinence syndrome and associated health care expenditures. JAMA. 2012;307: 1934-1940. 

142) Danziger P, Davis MM. Mandatory influenza vaccination programs for health care personnel in 
NACHRJ-associated children’s hospitals vs. non-children’s hospitals. Human Vaccines 
Immunotherapeutics. 2012;8:731-735. 

143) Singer DC, Davis MM, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Underinsurance for recently recommended 
vaccines in private health plans. Jour Community Health. 20 12;37: 1 164-1167. 

144) Macy ML, Clark SJ, Freed GL, Butchart AT, Singer DC, Sasson C, Meurer WJ, Davis MM. 
Carpooling and booster seats: a national survey of parents. Pediatrics. 2012;129:290-298. 

145) Weinberg SH, Butchart AT, Davis MM. Size of clinical trials and introductory prices of prophylactic 
vaccine series. Human Vaccines Immunotherapeutics. 2012;8:1066-1070. 

146) Patrick SW, Choi H, Davis MM. Increase in federal match associated with significant gains in 
coverage for children through Medicaid and SCHIP. Health Affairs. 2012;3 1: 1796-1802. 

147) Gowda C, Carlos RC, Butchart AT, Singer DC, Davis MM, Clark SJ, Dempsey AF. CHIAS: a 
standardized measure of parental HPV immunization attitudes and beliefs and its associations with 
vaccine uptake. Sexual Transmit Dis. 2012:39:475-481. 

148) Sears ED, Davis MM, Chung KC. Relationship between timing of emergency procedures and limb 
amputation in patients with open tibia fracture in the United States, 2003 to 2009. Plast Reconst 
Surg. 2012;130:369-378. 

149) Patrick SW, Schumacher RE, Davis MM. Variation in lumbar punctures for early onset neonatal 
sepsis: a nationally representative serial cross-sectional analysis, 2003-2009. BMC Pediatrics. 
2012:12:134. DOI: 10.1186/1471-2431-12-134. 

150) Patel MS, Davis MM, Lypson ML. The VALUE framework: training residents to provide value- 
based care for their patients. Jour Gen Intern Med. 2012;27:1210-1214. 

151) Sears ED, Burke JF, Davis MM, Chung K. The influence of procedure delay on resource utilization: 
a national study of patients with open tibial fracture. Plast Reconst Surg. 2013;131:553-563. 

152) Davis MM, Clark SJ, Butchart AT, Singer DC, Shanley TP, Gipson DS. Public participation in, and 
awareness about, medical research opportunities in the era of clinical and translational research. Clin 
TranslSci. 2013;6:88-93. 

153) Jensen KM, Davis MM. Health care in adults with Down syndrome: a longitudinal cohort study. 

Jour Intell Disability Res. 2013;57:947-958. 

154) Woolford SJ, Clark SJ, Butchart A, Geiger JD, Davis MM, Fagerlin A. To pay or not to pay: public 
perception regarding insurance coverage of obesity treatment. Obesity. 2013;21:E709-E714. 

155) Jensen KM, Davis MM, Cooke CM. Fidelity of administrative data when researching Down 
syndrome. Medical Care. 2013 Jan 25. [epub ahead of print] 

156) Auger K, Kahn R, Davis MM, Beck A, Simmons J. Medical home quality and readmission risk for 
children hospitalized with asthma exacerbations. Pediatrics. 2013;131:64-70. 

157) Sun GH, Auger KA, Aliu O, Patrick SW, Demonner S, Davis MM. Posttonsillectomy hemorrhage in 
children with von Willebrand disease or hemophilia. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 
2013;139:245-249. 

158) Abir M, Davis MM, Sankar P, Wong AC, Wang SC. Design of a model to predict surge capacity 
bottlenecks for bum mass casualties at a large academic medical center. Prehosp Disaster Med. 
2013;28:23-32. 

159) Jensen KM, Taylor LC, Davis MM. Primary care for adults with Down syndrome: adherence to 


Davis CV 


24 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



preventive healthcare recommendations. Jour Intell Disability Res. 2013;57:409-421. 

160) Pynnonen M, Davis MM. Extent of sinus surgery, 2000 to 2009: a population-based study. 
Laryngoscope. 20 1 3 ;[epub ahead of print] . 

161) Krans EE, Davis MM, Palladino CL. Disparate patterns of prenatal care utilization stratified by 
medical and psychosocial risk. Matern Child Health J. 2013;17:639-645. 

162) Aliu O, Davis MM, Demonner S, Chung KC. The influence of evidence in the surgical treatment of 
thumb basilar joint arthritis. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013;131:816-828. 

163) Goldenberg AJ, Dodson DS, Davis MM, Tarini BA. Parents’ interest in whole-genome sequencing 
of newborns. Genet Med. 2013;[epub ahead of print], 

164) Patrick SW, Schumacher RE, Davis MM. Methods of mortality risk adjustment in the NICU: a 20- 
yearreview. Pediatrics. 2013;131:S68-S74. 

165) DeCamp LR, Kieffer E, Zickafoose JS, DeMonner S, Valbuena F, Davis MM, Heisler M. The voices 
of limited English proficiency mothers on pediatric primary care: lessons for the medical home. 
Matern Child Health Jour. 2013;17:95-109. 

166) Patrick SW, Davis MM, Sedman AB, Meddings JA, Hieber S, Lee GM, Stillwell TL, Chenoweth 
CE, Espinosa CM, Schumacher RE. Accuracy of hospital administrative data in reporting central 
line-associated bloodstream infections in newborns. Pediatrics. 2013;131:S75-S80. 

167) Sun GH, Auger KA, Aliu O, Patrick SW, Demonner S, Davis MM. Variation in inpatient 
tonsillectomy costs within and between US hospitals attributable to postoperative complications. 

Med Care. 2013;51:1048-1054. 

168) Zickafoose JS, Davis MM. Medical home disparities are not created equal: differences in the 
medical home for children from different vulnerable groups. J Health Care Poor Underserved. 
2013;24:1331-1343. 

169) Walter JK, Benneyworth BD, Housey M, Davis MM. The factors associated with high-quality 
communication for critically ill children. Pediatrics. 2013;131:S90-S95. 

170) Krans EE, Davis MM, Schwarz EB. Psychosocial risk, prenatal counseling and maternal behavior: 
findings from PRAMS, 2004-2008. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2013;208:141.el-e7. 

171) Gaies MG, Jacobs JP, Cotts TB, Davis MM. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act: impact 
on care to patients with paediatric and congenital cardiac disease. Cardiol Young. 2013;10: 1-4. 

172) Walter JK, Burke JF, Davis MM. Research participation by low-income and race/ethnic minority 
groups: how payment may change the balance. Clin Trans Sci. 2013;6:363-371. 

173) Sun GH, Demonner S, Davis MM. Epidemiological and economic trends in inpatient and outpatient 
thyroidectomy in the United States, 1996-2006. Thyroid. 2013;23:727-733. 

174) Chang T, Choi H, Richardson CR, Davis MM. Implications of teen birth for overweight and obesity 
in adulthood. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2013;110:el-e7. 

175) Heisler M, Halasyamani L, Cowen ME, Davis MM, Resnicow K, Strawderman RL, Choi H, Mase R, 
Piette JD. Randomized controlled effectiveness trial of reciprocal peer support in heart failure. Circ: 
Heart Failure. 2013:6:246-253. 

176) Chang T, Davis MM. Potential adult Medicaid beneficiaries under the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act compared with current adult Medicaid beneficiaries. Ann Fam Med. 
2013;11:406-411. 

177) Haggins A, Patrick S, Demonner S, Davis MM. When coverage expands: children’s health insurance 
program as a natural experiment in use of health care services. Acad EmergMed. 2013;20: 1026- 
1032. 

178) Auger KA, Patrick SW, Davis MM. Infant hospitalizations for pertussis before and after Tdap 
recommendations for adolescents. Pediatrics. 2013;132:5:el 149-el 155. 

179) Cobb EM, Singer DC, Davis MM. Public interest in medical research participation: differences by 
volunteer status and study type. Clin Trans Sci. 2014;7:145-149. 


Davis CV 


25 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



180) Goldenberg AJ, Dodson DS, Davis MM, Tarini BA. Parents’ interest in whole-genome sequencing 
of newborns. Genet Medicine. 2014:16:78-84. 

181) Hanauer DA, Zheng K, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Public awareness, perception, and 
use of online physician rating sites. JAMA. 2014;311:734-735. 

182) Mueller EL, Park ER, Davis MM. What the Affordable Care Act means for survivors of pediatric 
cancer. Jour Clin Oncol. 2014;32:615-617. 

183) Moniz MH, Chang T, Davis MM. Attitudes about mandated coverage of birth control medication 
and other health benefits in a US national sample. JAMA. 20 14;3 1 1 :2539-254 1 . 

184) Hashikawa AN, Brousseau DC, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Emergency department and 
urgent care for children excluded from child care. Pediatrics. 2014; 134(l):el20-7. 

185) Auger KA, Kenyon CC, Feudtner C, Davis MM. Pediatric hospital discharge interventions to reduce 
subsequent utilization: a systematic review. J Hosp Med. 2014;9:251-260. 

186) Sekhar DL, Clark SJ, Davis MM, Singer DC, Paul IM. Parental perspectives on adolescent hearing 
loss risk and prevention. JAMA Otolaryngol HeadNeck Surg. 2014;140:22-28. 

187) Krans EE, Davis MM. Strong Start for mothers and newborns: implications for prenatal care 
delivery. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2014; 511-515. 

188) Kircher SM, Johansen ME, Nimeiri HS, Richardson CR, Davis MM. Impact of Medicare Part D on 
out-of-pocket drug costs and medical use for patients with cancer. Cancer. 2014;120:3378-3384. 

189) Auger KA, Kahn RS, Davis MM, Simmons JM. Pediatric asthma readmission: asthma knowledge is 
not enough? J Pediatr. 2014;166:101-108. 

190) Clark SA, Shoulders EN, Davis MM. Infant pertussis prevention information on Web sites of 
Michigan birthing hospitals. Am Jour Inf Cntrl. 2014;42:1241-1243. 

191) Sandberg KC, Davis MM, Gebremariam A, Adler J. Increasing hospitalizations in inflammatory 
bowel disease among children in the United States, 1988-2011. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2014;20: 1754- 
1760. 

192) Hanauer DA, Zheng K, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Parental awareness and use of 
online physician rating sites. Pediatrics. 2014;134:e966-975. 

193) Patrick SW, Kaplan HC, Passarella M, Davis MM, Lorch SA. Variation in treatment of neonatal 
abstinence syndrome in US children’s hospitals. J Perinatol. 2014;34:867-872. 

194) Sun GH, MacEachern MP, Perla RJ, Gaines JM, Davis MM, et al. Health care quality improvement 
publication trends. Am Jour Med Qual. 2014;29:403-407. 

195) Barbara RP, Odetola FO, Kidwell KM, Paden ML, Bartlett RH, Davis MM*, Annich GM* (*=joint 
senior authorship). Association of hospital-level volume of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
cases and mortality: analysis of the extracorporeal life support organization registry. Am JRespir 
Crit Care Med. 2015;191:894-901. 

196) Jensen KM, Sevick CJ, Seewald LAS, Halbower AC, Davis MM, McCabe ERB, et al. Greater risk 
of hospitalization in children with Down syndrome and OSA at higher elevation. Chest. 
2015;147:1344-1351. 

197) Patrick SW, Davis MM, Lehman CU, Cooper WO. Increasing incidence and geographic distribution 
of neonatal abstinence syndrome: United States 2009 to 2012. J Perinatol. Published online first 30 
Apr 2015; doi: 10. 1038/jp.2015.36. 

198) Krans EE, Moloci NM, Housey MT, Davis MM. Impact of psychosocial risk factors on prenatal care 
delivery: a national provider survey. Matern Child Health J. 2014;18:2362-2370 

199) Pynonnen MA, Lynn S, Kern HE, Novis SJ, Akkina SR, Keshavarzi NR, Davis MM. Diagnosis and 
treatment of acute sinusitis in the primary care setting: a retrospective cohort. Laryngoscope. 2015; 
published online first 22 May 2015;doi:10.1002/lary.25363. 

200) Auger KA, Jerardi KE, Simmons JE, Davis MM, O’Toole JK, Sucharew HJ. It’s complicated: 
overcoming statistical challenges of group learning in medical education research. J Grad Med Ed. 


Davis CV 


26 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



2015;7:326-330. 

201) Auger KA, Davis MM. Pediatric weekend admission and increased unplanned readmission rates. J 
HospMed. Published online first 18 Sep 2015, DOI: 10.1002/jhm.2426. 

Editorials and Commentaries (non-peer-reviewed) 

1) Davis MM, Lantos JD. Ethical considerations in the public policy laboratory. JAMA. 2000;284:85- 
87. 

2) Davis MM, Kemper AR. Valuing childhood vaccines. JPediatr. 2003;143:283-284. 

3) Davis MM. Race-based immunization recommendations and the potential to reduce racial 
disparities. JAMA. 2004;291:2253-2255. 

4) Davis MM, Szilagyi PG. Can quality improvement reach into pockets of need for childhood 
immunizations? AmbulPedia.tr 2004;4:224-225. 

5) Davis MM. Planning the next wave of SCHIP research. Pediatrics. 2005;115:492-494. 

6) Davis MM. Varicella vaccine, cost-effectiveness analyses, and vaccination policy. JAMA. 
2005;294:845-846. 

7) Van Cleave J, Kemper AR, Davis MM. Interpreting negative results from an underpowered clinical 
trial: warts and all. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2006;160:1126-1129. 

8) Garfield CF, Clark-Kauffman E, Davis MM. Fatherhood as a component of men’s health. JAMA. 
2006;296:2365-2368. 

9) Davis MM. Cardiac rehabilitation as a site for influenza vaccination? J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 
2007;27:210-211. 

10) Davis MM. Reasons and remedies for underinsurance for childhood and adolescent vaccines. 
JAMA. 2007;298:680-682. 

11) Davis MM, Brosco JP. Being specific about being special: definitions of childhood chronic 
conditions and children with special health care needs. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2007;161: 1003- 
1005. 

12) Davis MM. Challenges in cost-effectiveness analyses of hospital interventions to improve quality. 
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2008;29:395-397. 

13) Davis MM, Shah S. Necessary innovations in immunization delivery. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2009;163:483-485. 

14) Shah S, Davis MM. Old disease, innovative response: accelerating infant vaccination during a 
community pertussis outbreak. JAMA. 2009;301:2260-2261. 

15) Rivara FP, Davis MM. Archives journal club just a click away. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
2009;163:957. 

16) Davis MM. Medicaid, underinsurance, and the dawn of an era for children’s coverage. Pediatrics. 
2010;125:817-819. 

17) Davis MM. Price as a double-edged sword in the golden era of vaccines. Human Vaccines. 
2010;6:689-693. 

18) Davis MM. The conundrum of combination vaccines. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2010;164: 1171- 
1172. 

19) Chopra V, Davis MM. In search of equipoise. JAMA. 2011;305:1234-1235. 

20) Davis MM, Dayoub E. A strategic approach to therapeutic cancer vaccines in the 21 st century. 
JAMA. 2011;305:2343-2344. 

21) Davis MM, CP Gross, CM Clancy. Building a bridge to somewhere better: linking health care 
research and health policy. Health Services Res. 2012:47:329-336. 

22) Krans EE, Davis MM. Preventing Low Birthweight: 25 years, prenatal risk, and the failure to 
reinvent prenatal care. AmerJour Obstet Gynecol. 2012;206:398-403. 


Davis CV 


27 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



23) Christakis DA, Joffe A, Keren R, Davis MM, Shah SS, Rivara FP. Introducing JAMA Pediatrics. 
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2012;166:663. 

24) Davis MM, Riebschleger MP. The next century of children’s health care: addressing disparities, 
workforce deficiencies, and undercoordinated services. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 20 1 1 ; 1 65 : 1 067 - 
1068. 

25) Vickery KD, Sauser K, Davis MM. Policy responses to demand for health care access: from the 
individual to the population. JAMA. 2013;309:665-666. 

26) Patrick SW, Davis MM. Reformulating the federal match as a key to the sustainability of Medicaid. 
JAMA Pediatr. 2013;167:218-220. 

27) Davis MM. Stunting the growth of child health research: a need to reframe “children are not small 
adults.” JAMA Pediatr. 2013;167:598-599. 

Non-Peer-Reviewed Publications and Published Letters 

1) Davis MM. Music as a means of public health education among Guatemalan schoolchildren. Honors 
thesis. Harvard Medical School, Boston, 1994. 

2) Davis, MM. Health through song: Outreach workers in Benin and Guatemala use lyrics to promote 
health. Harv Med Alumni Bull. 1999;73:36-41. 

3) Davis MM. Health behaviors (helping patients change). In: Pocket Primary Care. LK Halasyamani, 
BP Lucas, eds. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001. pp.4-5. 

4) Davis MM. Effects and ethics of sanctions on childhood immunization rates. JAMA. 

2000;284:2057. [letter] 

5) Davis MM, Bruckman D, Cabana MD, Clark SJ, Dombkowski KJ, Kemper AR, Rushton JL, Freed 
GL. Constructive use of race and ethnicity variables. Arch Pediatr Adol Med. 2001;155:973. [letter] 

6) Davis MM, Kemper AR. Valuing vaccines. J Pediatr. 2004; 145:568. [letter] 

7) Davis MM. Effect of pneumococcal vaccination on quality of life in children with recurrent acute 
otitis media: a randomized, controlled trial. J Pediatr. 2005;147: 124-125. [comment] 

8) Davis MM. Cost-effectiveness of conjugate meningococcal vaccination strategies in the United 
States. J Pediatr. 2005;147:407-408. [comment] 

9) Davis MM. Acellular pertussis vaccine is protective for adolescents and adults. J Pediatr. 
2006;148:417. [comment] 

10) Davis MM, Patel MS, Halasyamani LK. Medicare prescription drug plan costs and affordability. J 
Gen Intern Med. 2007 ;available at: 

http://www.soringerlink.com/conteot/a8v3r3712v7732vl/fulltextpdf . 

1 1) Patrick SW, Schumacher RE, Davis MM. Neonatal abstinence syndrome — reply. JAMA. 
2012;308:762-764. [letter] 

Research and Policy Briefs (non-peer reviewed) 

1) Davis MM, Hibbard JH, Milstein A. Consumer tolerance for inaccuracy in physician performance 
ratings: one size fits none. Center for Studying Health System Change, Washington, DC: Issue Brief 
No. 110, March 2007. Available at: hf^:/7www.hschao.ge.org/CQNTENT/92i/. 

2) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. More children expected to seek care at retail clinics. C.S. Mott 
Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 1, Issue 1, April 
2007. Available at: http://www.rned. umich.edu/mott''research/chearreiailpoll.htnil 

3) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Smoking, drugs, and obesity top public’s list of health problems 
for children. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 1, Issue 2, May 2007. Available at: 


Davis CV 


28 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



http : //www . med. . uroich . edu/motbtesearch/chearheal theoncempol 1. him! 

4) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Majority of parents not in favor of state HPV vaccine mandates. 
C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 1, 
Issue 3, May 2007. Available at: http://vy ww.med.iimich.edu/mott/research/chearhpvvaccme.html 

5) Davis MM, Tarini B, Singer DC, Clark SJ. DNA biobanks and genetic testing - for whom, and 
when? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 1, Issue 4, June 2007. Available at: 

htt p ://www.med.umlch.edu/mott/fssearch/chea rgs neti.ctssti ng .htol 

6) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Covering families: how generous should SCHIP be? C.S. Mott 
Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 1, Issue 5, 
August 2007. Available at: http://www.rned. uTmch.edu/molthesearch/chearschip.htrnl 

7) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Flu vaccination among children may reach all-time high this year. 
C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 2, 
Issue 1, October 2007. Available at: htty://wwwrm.ed.inn;ch..edn/mott/research/chearfin.pori.'htnrl 

8) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Do high gas prices lead to less health care for kids? C.S. Mott 
Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 2, Issue 2, 
November 2007. Available at: http://www.med.rimich,eda/tnott/Tesearch/cheargasc.ard.htm1 

9) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Parental concerns about childhood obesity: time for a reality 
check? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 2, Issue 3, December 2007. Available at: 
http://wvm.med.iumch.edu/mott/rcsearch/chearbmi.html . 

10) Davis MM, Dempsey A, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Adolescent check-ups: parents want diet, drugs, and 
sex discussed. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 2, Issue 4, January 2008. Available at: 
http://wmv.med.umioh.edu/mott/research/chearcheckup.htiiti. 

1 1) Davis MM, Singer DC, Clark SJ. Adults and kids less protected than anticipated against the flu. 

C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 3, 
Issue 1, January 2008. Available at: h(to://mvw.med.timich.edu/mott/research/chearfluupdate.html . 

12) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Nearly 70 million Americans using discount generic 
prescription drug programs. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 3, Issue 2, February? 2008. Available at: 

http : // w w w .med. umich. edu/mott/rese arcli/cheai'd.grxprogram. html . 

13) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Child health threats: are consumer alerts enough? C.S. 
Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 3, Issue 3, 
March 2008. Available at: http://www.med.amich.edu/to.ott/researeh/chsarconsumeralerts.html. 

14) Davis MM, Yoon EY, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Ask the doctor: Is my child’s medicine 
FDA-approved? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 3, Issue 4, April 2008. Available at: 
http://www.med.umich.edu/mott/research/chearFDAapptovedm.edicines.html . 

15) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Children in research: many parents willing if risk of 
harm is small. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 3, Issue 5, May 2008. Available at: 
http://www.msd.utmch.edu/mott/research/cheaiChildrenIpResearch.html . 

16) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Summer safety for ‘tweens’ home alone. C.S. Mott 
Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 4, Issue 1, June 
2008. Available at: http : //www . med . umich. edu/mott/rese atxh/ chear S ururn er S afety .html . 

17) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Obesity tops list of biggest health problems for kids in 
2008. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 


Davis CV 


29 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Vol 4, Issue 2, July 2008. Available at: http://l3.edth.med. umich.eduA?ody.c.fm?id^4 15. 

18) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Retail clinics: an emerging source of health care for 
children. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 4, Issue 3, August 2008. Available at: httn://healfh.med.umich.edu/body.cfm?kty480 . 

19) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Bullying worries parents of overweight and obese 
children. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 4, Issue 4, September 2008. Available at: http://lrealth.med.rimich.edn/home npch.cfm?id~325. 

20) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Who do voters prefer for children’s health issues? 

C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 5, 
Issue 1, October 2008. Available at: http://health.med.im:dc3:redmbody.cfm?id^507 . 

21) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Knowledge key to support for embryonic stem cell 
research. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 5, Issue 2, October 2008. Available at: ht ip ://h.ealth.Tned.umlch.edu/bod.y.cfm?id~514. 

22) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Parents of high school athletes speak out on 
performance-enhancing drugs. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 5, Issue 3, November 2008. Available at: 
http://health..rned.umich..edu/ J bodv.cfm?id ::: 521 . 

23) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Mental health services for children and adolescents: 
missed opportunities in primary care & barriers to specialty care. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital 
National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 5, Issue 4, December 2008. 
Available at: http ://healtIx.med.nnuch. edu/body xfm?id-529 . 

24) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. For 12 million uninsured children, high barriers to 
dental care. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 5, Issue 5, February 2009. Available at: 
http://hea3th.med.umi.ch.edti/bo dy .cftn?id=538. 

25) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Private insurance in peril: millions of parents worried 
about costs, coverage. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 
of Michigan. Vol 6, Issue 1, March 2009. Available at: 

http: //health. med.umich. edu/body. cfm.?ld^547. 

26) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Sweet danger - public links alcopops, underage 
drinking. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 6, Issue 2, April 2009. Available at: 

http : //he al th. med, umich. edu/workfiles/n pch/04Q609repor t. pdf 

27) O’Malley AS, Tynan A, Cohen G, Kemper NM, Davis MM. Coordination of care by primary care 
practices: strategies, lessons and implications. Center for Studying Health System Change, Research 
Brief No. 12. Available at: http://www.hscha nge .Org / CQNTBNT/l 058/1 058.pdf. 

28) Davis MM, Leo H, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Are schools doing enough for food-allergic 
kids? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 

Vol 6, Issue 3, May 2009. Available at: http ://health.med. umich . edu/home- npch . cfi:n.?id ::: 325 . 

29) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Bicycle helmet laws effective but not yet the norm. 

C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 6, 
Issue 4, June 2009. Available at: htt p ://hea1th.med.umich.edu/hom e np ch.efm?id=325. 

30) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. For kids, hard economic times mean more stress, fewer 
doctor visits. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 7, Issue 1, July 2009. Available at: http://hea1ty.med.unrich.edu/bodv. cfm?id :::: 586 . 

3 1) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Public concern rising about childhood obesity. C.S. 
Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 7, Issue 2, 
August 2009. Available at: http :/7www . med . umich. edu/m otynpcb; reports/publ. i cconccm. him . 


Davis CV 


30 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



32) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Healthy food choices: can schools improve their 
grades? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 7, Issue 3, August 2009. Available at: 

http://www.med. i.mrich.edu/mottmpcM'eports/'foodchoice.htm . 

33) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Parents pan school performance on bullying 
prevention. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 7, Issue 4, September 2009. Available at: 

http : //www . med , umich . sdu/mott/npctyreports/safeschool .htm.. 

34) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Parents may underestimate the risks of H1N1 flu for 
their children. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 8, Issue 1, September 2009. Available at: 
http://www.med.umich.edrr/moa/npch/ rep orts/hfBl.htin. 

35) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Public to health care workers: get your H1N1 vaccine. 
C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 8, 
Issue 2, October 2009. Available at: http://www.med.amich.sdu/mott/npch/reports/flushot.httn . 

36) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Internet predators, privacy and porn concern parents. 
C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 8, 
Issue 3, November 2009. Available at: 

.http:/7www.m.sd.unric]r.edu./m.otfc' hp ch/r ep oite ; intemetsafe t\ 7 .hto. 

37) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. In age of ‘sexting’, parents weigh options to block 
inappropriate content. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 
of Michigan. Vol 8, Issue 4, December 2009. Available at: 

http://www.med. urnich.edu/mott/rmch/reports/cellphone.hto. . 

38) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Health care provider recommendations key to H1N1 
vaccination. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 9, Issue 1, January 2010. Available at: 
http://wvvw.med.umich.edu/mott/npcli/reports/lilhivac.htm . 

39) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Is the vaccine worse than the disease? C.S. Mott 
Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 9, Issue 2, 
February 2010. Available at: http://wwvv.med.umich.edu/jnott7npch/reports/hinlim.munization.htm. 

40) Davis MM, Macy ML, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark S J. Many parents not using booster seats, 
unaware of state laws for kids 4-8 years old. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on 
Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 9, Issue 3, March 2010. Available at: 
http:/7ww vv.med.umich.edu/mott/npch/reports/hoosterseathtm . 

41) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Speak or spank? More parents choose reasoning than 
physical discipline. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 9, Issue 4, April 2010. Available at: 
http://www.med.umich.edu/mott/apch/reportei/spank.htoi . 

42) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. “ePediatrics”: Parents want more communication with 
their kids’ doctors. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 9, Issue 5, May 2010. Available at: 
htt p ://www.med.tunich.edu/mott fep ch/xs p orts/comiiiunicafion.htPi. 

43) Clark SJ, Singer DC, Butchart A, Davis MM. Concussions in school sports: parents ill-prepared for 
role in reducing kids’ risks. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 10, Issue 1, June 2010. Available at: 
http://V/vvvv\m.gd.umich.edxu'm.ott/n p ch/re p orts/c-oncusslons..h.bn.. 

44) Tarini BA, Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Most parents interested in at-home genetic 
testing for their kids. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 


Davis CV 


31 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 





Michigan. Vol 10, Issue 2, July 2010. Available at: 
http ://www.m.ed.iimich.ediy'mott' hp ch/rs p orte. /ge nstic..htiu. 

45) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Obesity, stress, teen pregnancy top children’s health 
problems and getting worse. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 10, Issue 3, August 2010. Available at: 
htty:/Avww.med.umich.edu/mot.bh.pch/re p orl.s/t.opten.htm.. 

46) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. For e-cigarettes, public supports health warnings and 
ban on sales to minors. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 
of Michigan. Vol 10, Issue 4, September 2010. Available at: 
http://www.med.umich.edu/motf/npcli/reports/ecigaretts.htm . 

47) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Parent views on medical research — safety of vaccines 
and medicines top priorities. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 11, Issue 1, October 2010. Available at: 

http : //www.msd . nmich.edu/mott/ np ch/re p orts/medica1-research .him . 

48) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Gun shy? 14 million parents have never talked gun 
safety with their kids. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 
of Michigan. Vol 1 1, Issue 2, November 2010. Available at: 

http : //www . med . uroich . edu/mott/ np ch/r ep orts / g un s hy .htm. 

49) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Strong public support for innovative programs to 
prevent teen pregnancy. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 

University of Michigan. Vol 1 1, Issue 3, January 2011. Available at: 
http://www.gied.umich.edu/giotf/npch/reports/pregnaricv.htm . 

50) Davis MM, Lewis TC, Hershenson M, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Tobacco: a smoking gun 
for kids’ asthma attacks. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 1 1, Issue 4, January' 2011. Available at: 

http : //www .med . imuch.edu/mott/npch/reporte/smoking . htm . 

5 1) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Despite warnings, parents continue to use cough and 
cold medicines for young kids. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 12, Issue 1, February 2011. Available at: 
http://www.med.umich.edu/mott/n p ch/r ep orts/coldTned.htax. 

52) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Parents wants explanations, not scare tactics, from the 
media about children’s health. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 12, Issue 2, March 2011. Available at: 
http://www.med.iunich.edu/moUAtpch/Teports/explanaaon.hta . 

53) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Gym gone but not forgotten? Parents want more 
physical activity at school for kids. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 12, Issue 3, April 2011. Available at: 
http://www.med.iunich.edu/mott/gpch/reporls/gym.htax . 

54) Davis MM, Woolford SJ, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Bariatric surgery for teens: how young is 
too young? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 12, Issue 4, May 2011. Available at: 

http : //www . med . umich . edu/mott /npch/reports/bariafaic. htm . 

55) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Few parents enforce shower-before-pool rules that 
prevent illness from water parks. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 13, Issue 1, June 2011. Available at: 
http://\¥vvw.m.ed.umich.edxg'motf/n p ch/re p orts/watersafety.htm. 

56) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Clark SJ. Most parents unaware of research opportunities for 
their children. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 


Davis CV 


32 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



Michigan. Vol 13, Issue 2, July 2011. Available at: 
hap ://www.med.uniich.edii/mott^ ap oh/re p orte/researcho pp .htm, 

57) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. Drug abuse now equals childhood 
obesity as top health concern for kids. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 13, Issue 3, August 2011. Available at: 

http : // www . med . uroich . edu/mot.t/npch. / re p orts/to p ien20 1 1 . him . 

58) Davis MM, Biermann B, Marcus S, Hua L, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. Parents 
say, “Other teens drink and use marijuana, but my kids don’t.” C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital 
National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 13, Issue 4, September 2011. 
Available at: htto://www.med.itmich.edi?/motfc/npch/feports/'ssubstanceuse.htm . 

59) Macy ML, Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. Parents turning car seats to 
face forward too early. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 
of Michigan. Vol 13, Issue 5, September 2011. Available at: 
http://wvyw.msd.umich.edu/mott fep ch/re p orts/carseats.htni. 

60) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark S J. Many young children off to a poor 
start with dental health. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 
of Michigan. Vol 13, Issue 6, October 2011. Available at: 

http : //www . med . uroich . edu/motV np ch/r ep orts/den talhealtfa.h im . 

61) Davis MM, Mohr B, Markman L, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. Many infants at 
risk in unsafe sleep settings. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 13, Issue 7, November 2011. Available at http://motinpch.org/reports- 
surveys/rnanv-infaEvls-risk-unsafe-sleep-setiings . 

62) Clark S J, Sekhar DL, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Davis MM. Silent risk: most parents 
and teens not talking about noise-induced hearing loss. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll 
on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 14, Issue 1, December 2011. Available at: 

http://mottnpch.org/reports-sfflvevs/kilerit~risk-most-parents-and-teens~not-taikmg-about-noise- 
indue ed-hearing-ioss . 

63) Davis MM, Rosen DS, Christner J, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. School obesity 
programs may promote worrisome eating behaviors and physical activity. C.S. Mott Children’s 
Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 14, Issue 2, January 2012. 
Available at: ht tp ://mott np ch.o rp,7 're p orte-sun''e v s/sch.ool-obesit v - p r ogr am.s-m ay - p rom.ots-worrisom.e- 
eating-behavior s-and-phvsical-actmW - 

64) Clark S J, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Davis MM. Too much of a good thing? Kids in 
low-income families drink more juice than recommended. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National 
Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 14, Issue 3, February 2012. Available at: 

ht.tp:/7nrot.tnpch.org/reports-su.rve v s/t.oo-miich-g o od-t.hiuR - kids-1ow-incoms-famili&s-drink-mors- 

iuic-s-recom.men.ded. 

65) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. For youth sexting: public supports 
education, not criminal charges. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 15, Issue 1, March 2012. Available at: 

ht^>://www.mottnpch.org/reports-s«r\ r ey s/youth.-sexting-public-supports-education-not-criminal- 

charees. 

66) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. Easy-access medicines a poisoning risk 
for kids at home. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 15, Issue 2, April 2012. Available at: http://vvw^^^mottIipch.org/renorts-survevs/'easY- 
access-medicines-poisoning-risk-kids-home. 

67) Clark S J, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Davis MM. Pay-to-play sports keeping low-income 
kids out of the game. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 


Davis CV 


33 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



of Michigan. Vol 15, Issue 3, May 2012. Available at: h ttp ://www.mott np ch.o rg /r ep orts- 
su r\?ev s/ p a v - p ia v -s p orts-kes p mg - lower-incoms-kids-out -s?; am.s. 

68) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark S J. Public wants Presidential candidates to 
address childhood obesity, bullying. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 16, Issue 1, June 2012. Available at: 
http://www.mottppch.org/reports-survey's /p ubllc-wants-presidential-candidates-address-childhood- 
obesity -bull y ing. 

69) Clark S J, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Davis MM. Public reluctant to support teen HPV 
vaccination without parental consent. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 16, Issue 2, July 2012. Available at: 

http://www-Enottnpch.org/reports-sarvevs/public-reluctent-support-teen-hpv-vaccination-without- 
parental -consent 

70) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. Top 10 child health concerns: exercixe, 
obesity, smoking lead list. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 16, Issue 3, August 2012. Available at: 

http://www.mottnpch.org/rer>orts-survevs/tor>-10-chiM-health-concerns-exercise-obesitv-smoking- 

lead-list . 

71) Davis MM, Singer DC, Butchart A, Kauffman AD, Clark SJ. Bullying: when should schools take 
action? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 16, Issue 4, September 2012. Available at: ha p ://www,mottHpob..org/reports-survevs/builying- 
whsn-shcmld-schools-take-actiQn . 

72) Davis MM, Hashikawa A, Singer DC, Butchart AT, Kauffman AD, Clark S J. Sick kids, struggling 
parents. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. 
Vol 16, Issue 5, October 2012. Available at: htt p ://ww\v.mot tap ch.org / re p orts-surveys/sick-kids- 
st mgglmR-p arents. 

73) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Public supports expanded Internet 
safety requirements to protect kids. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 17, Issue 1, November 2012. Available at: 

http://%vww.m.otto.pch.org/reports-surv ey s/ p ublic-su pp orts-expanded-iuterriet-safety-requirem.ents- 

protect-kids . 

74) Davis MM, Lesperance M, Handelsman J, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. 
Parents loud and clear: test tweens and teens for hearing loss, too. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital 
National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 17, Issue 2, December 2012. 
Available at: http://mottapch.Org/renorts-sui-veys/r) arents-loud-and-cleai'-test-teens-and-tweens- 
heari ng- loss-too. 

75) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Parents numb to misuse of 
narcotic pain medicines by youth? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 17, Issue 3, January 2013. Available at: http:/7mottnp&h.org/re.ports- 
survevs/parents-uumb-misuse-narcotic-pain-medicines-vouth . 

76) Davis MM, Udow-Phillips M, Riba M, Young D, Roy an R. Primary care capacity and health reform: 
is Michigan ready? January 2013. Center for Healthcare Research and Transformation. Ann Arbor, 
MI. Available at: htt p ://www.chxt. o rg/pu bllc -p o'iic y/p oiic v -brlefs/ p riman ' -care-ca p aclt v -and-h.ealth- 
reform-is-michigan-re-ady/ . 

77) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. How to select a child’s doctor? 
Parents prefer grapevine to online. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 17, Issue 4, February 2013. Available at: ht tp ://mottnpch.org/repotts- 
survcys/how-se1ect-child%E2%80%99s-doctor-parents-prefer-grapevine-online. 

78) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Just what the doctor ordered? Not 


Davis CV 


34 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



for many parents. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 18, Issue 1, March 2013. Available at: ht tp :/7mott ap ch.o rg/ re p orts-survc v s/j n gt- 
what-doctor-ordcred-not-man v-n arente. 

79) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Parents ignore warning labels, 
give cough and cold meds to young kids. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 18, Issue 2, April 2013. Available at: 

http://mottnpch.org/reports-surve v s /p axents-ig n ore-wami ng- labe1s-give-cough-cold-ineds-vom3.g- 

klds. 

80) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. One in ten teens using “study 
drugs,” but are parents paying attention? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 18, Issue 3, May 2013. Available at: 

http://mottnpch.org/reports-stirve v s/one-t6n-teens-usi ng -%E2%80%9Cstodv-dmg8%E2%80%9D-are- 
parents- p a y in .g- at.ten u on . 

81) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Protecting newborns from 
whooping cough. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 18, Issue 4, June 2013. Available at: http://mottnnch.org/rer)orts-survevs/'protecting- 
newboms-whooping-cough . 

82) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Broad public support for banning 
smoking in vehicles with kids present. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 19, Issue 1, July 2013. Available at: 

http://mottrmch.org/reports-survews/broad~pnbhe~sapport~battnmg-smoking-vshicjes~kids-j3resenl . 

83) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Top child health concerns: 
obesity, drug abuse, and smoking. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 19, Issue 2, August 2013. Available at: htt p ://mottn p ch.o rg /re p orts- 
surv'evs/t op -chlld-healtlr-concems-obesl ty -dnig - abuse-aBd-smoki ng . 

84) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Top public priorities for 
children’s health research: cancer, diabetes, birth defects. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National 
Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 19, Issue 3, September 2013. Available at: 
ht^?://mottnpch.org/reports-surve y s/to p - p ublic- p riorities-children.%E2%80%99s-health-research- 
eancer-diabetes-blrth-defects. 

85) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Email consultation: co-pay or no- 
pay? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 
19, Issue 4, October 2013. Available at: http://mottapch.org/reports-surveys/email-consultaiion-co- 
pay-or-no-pay . 

86) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Medical research needs kids, but 
parents not aware of opportunities. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 19, Issue 5, November 2013. Available at: ht tp ://mott np ch. or g.reports- 
surveys/medical-rcsearch-needs-kids-pareiits-not-aware-opportumiies . 

87) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Adults worry e-cigarettes will 
encourage kids to start smoking tobacco. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 20, Issue 1, December 2013. Available at: 
htt p ://mottn p ch..org / r ep orts-sun 7 e v s/adxilfs-w j orr y -e-c ig: arettss-will-encourag e -kids-start.-smo.ki ns: - 
tobacco . 

88) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Seeing specialists: Roles of 
parents and providers unclear. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 20, Issue 2, January 2014. Available at: ht tp ://mottn p ch.org / r ep oris- 
surveys/seeing-specialists-roies -p arents-providers-unclear. 

89) Davis MM, Moniz MH, O’Connell LK, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. 


Davis CV 


35 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



“Breast is best” but uninsured parents take breastfeeding classes less often. C.S. Mott Children’s 
Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 20, Issue 3, February 2014. 
Available at: http:/.'teottapch.orR/reports-sun'Cvs/%B2%80%9Cbreast-be5t%B2%80%9D-unin.snred- 
parents-take-breastfeedmg-dasses-less-ofien . 

90) Clark SJ, Greenhawt M, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Nut-free lunch? 
Parents speak out. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of 
Michigan. Vol 20, Issue 4, March 2014. Available at: h t ip : //motfopch. or g/reports-survey s/'n ut-free - 
lunch -p arents- sp eak-out 

91) Davis MM, Inniss AK, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Screening out screen 
time: Parents limit media use for young children. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on 
Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 21, Issue 1, April 2014. Available at: 

h.ttp:/7mottnpch.org/report.s-survev&''screening-out-screen-time-parents-limit-media-use-voun.g- 

chlldren. 

92) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Fighting childhood obesity: Are 
schools passing or failing? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 21, Issue 2, May 2014. Available at: http://motlnpch.org/reports- 
survevs/figfating-childhood-obesits'-are-schools-passijag-or-failing . 

93) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Sports physicals: convenient 
versus comprehensive? C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University 
of Michigan. Vol 21, Issue 3, June 2014. Available at: ht tp : //moto oc h . o rg/ tc p o its -surve y s/ sp orts - 
physicals-convenient-versus-comprehensive . 

94) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. The circumcision decision: 

Parents want info, not directives, from docs. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on 
Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 21, Issue 4, July 2014. Available at: 
http://mottnpch.orR/reports-suivevs/circumclslon-d.eclsion-parents-want.-mfo-not-direct.ives-docs. 

95) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. School violence, gun-related 
injuries in top 10 child health concerns in U.S. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on 
Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 22, Issue 1, August 2014. Available at: 
http://motopch.org/reports-sttrvevs/school-violence-gun-r6lat6d-inittri68-top-1.0-child-health- 
concents-us . 

96) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis MM. Head smart? Parents get 
confidence boost from concussion education. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on 
Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 22, Issue 2, September 2014. Available at: 
http://mottnpch.org/reports-survey s/head-smart-parents-get-confidence-boost-concussion-education . 

97) Davis MM, Woolford SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Clark SJ. Nutrition facts: how 
moms and dads view labels differently. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 22, Issue 3, October 2014. Available at: 
http://motopch.org/reporis-surve vs/nnP'ition-facts-how-moms-and-dads-view-labds-differently . 

98) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Matos-Moreno A, Davis MM. Parents support 
daycare policies to get kids up-to-date on vaccines. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on 
Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 22, Issue 4, November 2014. Available at: 
http://mottnpch.org/reports-survevs/parents-s upp ort-d ay care-policies-get-kids-date-vacclnes. 

100) Davis MM, Fredericks E, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Matos-Moreno A, Clark SJ. 
Can their 18-year-olds make a doctor’s appointment? Half of parents say no. C.S. Mott Children’s 
Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, University of Michigan. Vol 22, Issue 5, December 
2014. Available at: http://inotto p ch.o rg/ r epo rts-surveys/can-their-18-vear-olds-make- 
doctOT%E2%80%99s~ app ointment-half -p arents-s ay -no. 

101) Davis MM, for the Michigan Department of Community Health. Recommendations for addressing 


Davis CV 


36 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



the needs of high utilizer / super utilizer patients in Michigan. Submitted to the Michigan Legislature, 
December 2014. 

102) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Matos-Moreno A, Davis MM. Pay-to-play 
sports keeping some kids on the sidelines. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 22, Issue 6, January 2015. Available at: 
http://mottnpch.org/reports-survev& / pa v - p Iav-sports-ke epmg -8ome-kids-sidelm.es. 

103) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Clark SJ. Parents conflicted about later 
school start times for teens. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 23, Issue 1, February 2015. Available at: http://mottnpch.org/reports- 
sun.'eys/parents-conflicted-abont-lat&r-school-start-iimes-teens . 

104) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Davis MM. Parents on social media: likes 
and dislikes of sharenting. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 23, Issue 2, March 2015. Available at: htt p : / /mott np ch . o r g/ reports- 
surveys/parents-soeial-media-likes-and-dislikes-sharenti ng' . 

105) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Clark SJ. Support for medical marijuana 
use lower for kids than for adults. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 23, Issue 3, April 2015. Available at: hd:p://mottnpch.org/reporte- 
sorveys/support-medical-mariiuaaa-ase-lower-kids-Malts. 

106) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Davis MM. Many parents missing the link 
between child behavior and health. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 23, Issue 4, May 2015. Available at: 
http://mottnpch.org/ret?orts-sur\ , evs/manv-parents-misging-link-between-child-behavior-and-he.alih . 

107) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Clark SJ. Too convenient? Majority of 
adults support bans on powdered alcohol. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 24, Issue 1, June 2015. Available at: 

http://mottnpch.org/reporis-survevs/too-convenient-maiority-adults-support-bans-powde-red-alcohol . 

108) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Clark SJ. Safer, with more benefits: 
parents’ views on vaccines shifting. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 24, Issue 2, July 2015. Available at: 

http://mottnpeh.org/reporLs-survevs/safer~m.ore~benefite-parenfs%E2%80%99-vaceines-ylews- 

shiftin g . 

109) Davis MM, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Clark SJ. Top 10 child health problems: 
more concern for sexting, Internet safety. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s 
Health, University of Michigan. Vol 24, Issue 3, August 2015. Available at: 

http://mottnpch.org/reports-surveys/to p -fO-child.-health- p roblems-more-con.cern-sexting-intemet- 

safetv. 

110) Clark SJ, Kauffman AD, Singer DC, Matos-Moreno A, Davis MM. Parents conflicted about how to 
label, punish cyberbullying. C.S. Mott Children’s Hospital National Poll on Children’s Health, 
University of Michigan. Vol 24, Issue 4, September 2015. Available at: htfo.V/molfopch.org/reporls- 
surveys/parents-conflicted-about-how-label-purtish-cybeTbulIving . 


Opinion/Editorial Publications in Lay Press (non-peer-reviewed) 

1) Davis MM. Expanding kids’ care won’t socialize medicine. The Detroit News. October 10, 2007 

2) Osta AD, Davis MM. ‘Going green’ means gasping for air. The Detroit News. January 9, 2008. 

3) Tarini BA, Davis MM. Laws won’t erase genetic dilemmas. The Detroit News. May 28, 2008. 

4) Davis MM. Use Michigan’s existing tobacco laws to cover e-cigarettes. The Detroit Free Press. 
May 6, 2014. 


Davis CV 


37 


Last updated: 10/1/2015 



I 


Eric P. Rothstein, CPA 

Principal 


Education 

MA, Economics, University of California-Davis, 1983 

A.B., Economics, Ripon College, 1981 

Distinguishing Qualifications 

♦ Experienced Project Manager that has established strategic financial plans and designed rates for some of 
the nation’s largest, most complex infrastructure programs and has secured acceptance of major, multi- 
year rate increases in politically charged environments. 

♦ Expert in regionalization, facilitation of complex decisions affecting diverse stakeholder groups, evaluation 
of public/private partnerships, and strategic business planning. 

♦ National leadership roles in the water industry including the Water Environment Federation (WEF) Utility 
Management Committee and American Water Works Association's (AWWA) Competitive Practices and 
Rates and Charges Committees. 

Expert Witness Depositions and Testimony 

♦ Direct Testimony by Declaration (2014) - Superior Court Of California, County of Los Angeles, Central District, 
Cities of Cerritos, Downey and Signal Hill vs. Water Replenishment District of Southern California, Lead Case 
No. Bs128136 

♦ Expert Witness Testimony (2013) - Nova Scotia Utility and Review Board: In the Matter of a Joint Application by the 
Halifax Regional Water Commission and the Halifax-Dartmouth Bridge Commission for a Determination of 
Appropriate Charges Related to the Use of the Angus L. Macdonald. (M06127) 

♦ Expert Report (2013) - San Diego County Water Authority v. Metropolitan Water District of Southern 
California, Case No: CPF-10-510830 and CPF-12-512466, Superior Court of California, County of San 
Francisco, regarding rate setting challenges. 

♦ Expert Witness Testimony (2013) -Hawaii Public Utilities Commission, In the Matter of the Application of 
Hawaiian Beaches Water Company, Inc., for review and approval of rate increases; revised rate schedules, 
Docket No. 2013-0203. 

♦ Deposition And Expert Witness Testimony (2013): United States Bankruptcy Court, Northern District Of 
Alabama, Southern Division, In Re: Jefferson County, Alabama, a political subdivision of the State Of 
Alabama, Debtor, Case No.: 11-05736-Tbb, Chapter 9, The Bank Of New York Mellon as Indenture Trustee, 
etal., Plaintiffs v. Jefferson County, Alabama, Defendant, AP No.: 12-00016-Tbb, 

♦ Expert Witness Testimony (2013) - Nova Scotia Utility and Review Board: Application for the Approval of a 
Schedule of Rates and Charges and Schedule of Rules and Regulations for the Delivery of Water, 
Wastewater and Stormwater Services, Matter No, M05463 



♦ Expert Witness Testimony (2012) - Public Service Commission of Wisconsin: Application of City of 
Waukesha Water Utility, Waukesha County, Wisconsin, for Authority to Increase Water Rates Docket No. 
6240- WR- 107 

♦ Expert Witness Testimony (2009-2011) - United States District Court, Northern District of Georgia, Atlanta 
Division, United States of American and the State of Georgia, Plaintiffs v. The City of Atlanta, Defendant, Civil 
Action File No, 1-98-CV-1956-TWT, (various hearings re: Schedule Extension, Service Delivery Strategy) 

♦ Expert Witness Testimony (2012) - Public Service Commission of Wisconsin: Application of Oak Creek 
Water and Sewer Utility For Authority to Increase Water Rates, Docket No. 4310-WR-104 

♦ Expert Witness Testimony (2011) - Nova Scotia Utility and Review Board: Application of the Halifax 
Regional Water Commission for approval of a Cost of Service and Rate Design Methodology (NSUARB-W- 
HRWC-R-11) 

♦ Expert Witness Testimony (2010, 2014) - Public Service Commission of Wisconsin: Application of 
Milwaukee Water Works, Milwaukee Water Works, Milwaukee County for Authority to Increase Water Rates, 
Docket No. 3720-WR-107 and Docket No. 3720-WR-108 

♦ Deposition (2010): The Bank of New York v. Jefferson County, Alabama, Civil Action No. CV-2009-02318. 

♦ Expert Witness Testimony (2009) - Illinois Commerce Commission, lllinois-American Water Company, 
Proposed general increase in water and sewer rates, Docket No: 07-0507 

♦ Expert Witness Testimony (2009) - In the Court of Appeals of Georgia; Fulton County Georgia et al. v. City of 
Atlanta, A08A2364 

Selected Key Project Experience 

For the U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Eastern District of Michigan, Southern Division Eric Rothstein has served 
as an independent utility advisor for mediation related to the creation of the Great Lakes Water Authority 
(GLWA). Following execution of a Memorandum of Understanding and Articles of Incorporation by the 
Incorporating Municipalities (City of Detroit, Macomb, Oakland and Wayne counties, and the State of Michigan), 
Mr. Rothstein was appointed to serve as Implementation Planning Program Manager for the standup of the 
GLWA - a regional utility serving approximately 40% of the population of the State of Michigan. 

For Water Replenishment District of Southern California, Eric Rothstein was engaged to provide an expert 
report related to the consistency of the District’s rate setting requirements with industry-standard practices 
contemplating proportionate distribution of cost responsibilities based on cost causation. These practices are 
consistent with prescripts of State of California law. 

For Jefferson County, Alabama, Eric Rothstein has served as the County’s rate consultant since 2010. He has 
reviewed cost-of service analyses and alternative rate proposals to address the County’s outstanding sewer 
warrant obligations, developed revisions to its sewer rates approved in November 2012, and again in September 
2013, and is leading strategic financial planning related to the County’s bankruptcy Plan of Adjustment. Mr. 
Rothstein has been deposed and provided expert witness testimony in various court proceedings stemming from 
the County’s declaration of bankruptcy in 201 1 , and has led development of a Municipal Advisor Report related to 
a planned Series 2013 Sewer Warrant issue to effectuate the County’s exit from bankruptcy. 

For the Halifax Regional Water Commission, Eric Rothstein led development of a Cost of Service and Rate 
Design report to the Nova Scotia Utility and Accounting Review Board (NSUARB Docket No. NSUARB-W- 
HRWC-R-1 1), in response to the Board’s Order and Decision to hold separate hearings to determine appropriate 



ratemaking methodologies for Canada’s first regulated water, wastewater and stormwater utility. Eric led 
preparation of the report and the development of cost allocation and rate design models to illustrate the 
implications of alternative methodological approaches. Eric supported development of HRWC’s subsequent 
application for water, wastewater and stormwater rates filed with the NSUARB in December 2012 and provided 
expert witness testimony in support thereof in April 2012. In April 2014, Eric prepared a HRWC Cost Shares for 
Use of the Angus L. Macdonald Bridge and provided expert witness testimony in M06127 - Halifax-Dartmouth 
Bridge Commission/Halifax Regional Water Commission: Waterline on the Angus L. MacDonald Bridge - HDBC- 
G-14 

For the City of Atlanta, since 2004, Mr. Rothstein has served as the Department of Watershed Management's 
primary coordinator for its revenue bond issues used to finance its $3 billion wastewater Consent Decree 
program. This has included issues in 2004, 2008, 2009 (2), 2013 and 2015 and, in 2006, implementation of its 
Tax-Exempt Commercial Paper program with a shelf registration of $1.2 billion. Mr. Rothstein led development of 
the Department’s Financial Capability Based Schedule Extension Request Report used to secure the City's 13- 
year extension of its wastewater Consent Decree schedule. He prepared each of the Department’s Financial 
Capability Assessment filings. He has led the development and updating of strategic financial planning tools for 
water and sewer rate development and policy-level consideration of overall program financing strategies (as well 
as detailed project expenditure, status, and schedule tracking). 

For the Egyptian Ministry of Housing, through a USAID contract, Mr. Rothstein developed guidance on tariff 
setting, capital project prioritization, and strategic planning for the newly established water and wastewater sector 
regulatory agency. The project involved the development of a guidance manual, detailed financial planning and 
cost-of-service analysis modeling, and testing of financial analysis and prioritization tools with four major 
Egyptian utilities. Mr. Rothstein has also provided presentations on financial planning and strategic planning 
principles to USAID staff and Technical Assistance contractors. 

For the Milwaukee Wholesale Customers, through sub-contracts with SHEH, Inc., Mr. Rothstein reviewed the 
Milwaukee Water Works rate increase applications filed in 2010 and 2014, reviewed pre-filed testimony, and 
offered expert witness testimony related to revenue requirements and appropriate rates of return at hearings 
before the Wisconsin Public Service Commission. 

For several wastewater permittees facing Consent Decrees including the City of Akron, East Bay Municipal 
Utility District, Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer District, Metropolitan Sewer District of St. Louis, and the 
City and County of Honolulu, Mr. Rothstein has assisted in the conduct of financial capability assessments per 
EPA prescribed methodologies and in the development of alternative approaches to assessment that more 
appropriately reflect utility capital financing options. These efforts have been used in the formulation of 
negotiation positions related to the scope and schedule of potential Consent Decree provisions. Mr. Rothstein is 
currently engaged with the City of Peoria, IL and with the Guam Waterworks Authority, in similar Consent 
Decree negotiations. 

For the National Association of Clean-Water Agencies, Mr. Rothstein has served as Principal Author for the 
development of several of the association’s white papers and publications related to Financial Capability 
Assessments used to develop wastewater Consent Decree schedules. These publications include NACWA’s 
Financial Capability and Affordability in Wet Weather Negotiations (2007), and The Evolving Landscape for 
Financial Capability Assessment: Clean Water Act Negotiations and the Opportunities of Integrated Planning 
(2013). These papers provide critical reviews of the U.S, Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) established 
policies and guidance on financial capability assessments for wet weather programs and offers practical 
guidance for negotiations on enforcement policies and practices related to consideration of financial capability. 

For the City of Winnipeg, Manitoba, Mr. Rothstein served as Project Manager for a comprehensive cost-of- 
service rate studies for the City’s water, wastewater and stormwater systems conducted in 1997 and 2012. In 
1997, the consulting team facilitated decision-making through an extensive public involvement process that 



featured monthly meetings of a Citizen’s Advisory Committee comprised of a diverse set of stakeholder 
representatives, For both studies, detailed cost allocation analyses were conducted and customized computer 
rate analysis models developed to facilitate rate updating for budgetary changes, revision to cost allocations, and 
rate design modifications, 

For Augusta-Richmond County, Georgia, Mr, Rothstein has provided strategic financial planning, bond 
feasibility and comprehensive cost-of-service rate assistance since 2000. Strategic financial planning facilitated 
the City’s adoption of a seven-year, 1 1 percent per annum rate increase schedule to support infrastructure re- 
investment in excess of $400 million. Mr. Rothstein managed 3 bond feasibility studies over the course of the 
program implementation, helping the County to secure strong credit ratings and favorable financing. A cost-of- 
service study in 2004 involved special queries of a new billing system for development of user characteristic data 
and consideration of specific cost assignments for previously unsewered portions of the County’s wastewater 
system. 

Previous to his work as a utility management consultant, Mr. Rothstein served in several financial management 
positions for the City of Austin, Texas. In this capacity, he directed staffs of up to 22 members in utility 
ratemaking, evaluation of regionalization alternatives and proposed utility investments, analysis of capital 
financing options, internal control evaluation, and revenue forecasting. 

Certifications / Professional Licenses 

Certified Public Accountant 

Oregon License No. 7998, June 1995 

Membership in Professional Organizations 

American Water Works Association 

• Strategic Management Practices Committee 

• Rates and Charges Sub-Committee 

- Chair, Water Rate Structures and Pricing, AWWA M34 
Member, Water Rates, AWWA, Ml 

International Water Association 

• Economics and Statistics Specialist Group 

• Editorial Board, Utility Management International (2008-2012) 

National Association of Clean Water Agencies 

• Utility Management Committee 

Water Environment Federation 

• Utility Management Committee 

• Chair, Finance and Administration Sub-Committee 

• Chair, Financing and Charges for Wastewater Systems (M27), Manual of Practice Task Force 

• Coordinator, Asset Management Plot Topics Workshops, 2005 - 2007 

• Technical Practice Committee, Vice Chair 

Selected Publications 

Sustainability Reporting Statements for Wastewater Systems, WEF Special Publication, October 2012 (Task 
Force Chair, Chapter 1 Author) 



“The Business Case for Low Income Affordability Programs,” Proceedings of the AWWA-WEF Utility 
Management Conference, Miami, FL, February 2012. 

GBMSD's Strategic Planning: A Portfolio Management Approach to Effective Utility Management” with Tom 
Sigmund, Proceedings of the AWWA-WEF Utility Management Conference, Miami, FL, February 2012. 

“Financial Sustainability in an Uncertain World” with Debbie Galardi, Water Utility Management International, vol. 

6, issue 4 (December 2011) pp. 23-27. 

“Developing A Financially Sustainable Capital Program to Meet Consent Decree Requirements”, Proceedings of 
the Water Environment Federation Technology Exposition and Conference (WEFTEC), October 2009 

“Regionalization of Water Service in Central Florida: Capacity Rights Contracting for the Yankee Lake WTF”, 
Proceedings of the American Water Works Association (AWWA) Annual Conference and Exposition, June 2007 
and the Florida Water Resources Conference, April 2007 

“Affordability Tools,” Section 8: Affordability Special Publication, Water Environment Federation, 2007 

“Tough Choices in Paradise: Capital Project Prioritization on Oahu,” with Ross Kaneko, Barry Usagawa, Scott 
Muraoka and Jason Takaki, Proceedings of the American Water Works Association (AWWA) - Water 
Environment Federation (WEF) Joint Management Conference, February 2007 and Proceedings of the American 
Water Works Association (AWWA) Annual Conference and Exposition, June 2007. 

“Financial Sustainability As A Foundation For Infrastructure Development And Management: Best Practices” with 
Debbie Galardi, Water Utility Management International, vol. 2, issue 1 (March 2007) pp. 10-13 

Selected Presentations / Seminars 

“Exit from Bankruptcy: Jefferson County, Alabama’s Historic Plan of Adjustment and $1.7 Billion Sewer Warrant 
Issue Sustainability Reporting Statements for Wastewater Systems”, Utility Management Conference, Austin, TX, 
February 2015. 

“The Business Case for Sustainability Reporting”, Sustainability Reporting Statements for Wastewater Systems 
Special Publication Workshop, WEFTEC 2013, October 2013. 

“Building Support for Rate Increases” Central States Water Environment Federation, May 17, 2013 

“Which Direction is Your Utility Heading”, 2012 Illinois City Managers Association, Galena, Illinois, June 28, 2012 

“Financial Sustainability in an Uncertain World”, Illinois AWWA, March 2012 

“Doing More With Less: Financial Planning and Management in Stressful Times”, Central States Water 
Environment Federation Wisconsin Government Affairs Seminar, February 23, 2012 

“Financing Water Utilities’ Sustainability Initiatives: Challenging Institutionalized Governance and Market Failures" 
with Debbie Galardi, Proceedings of the 2012 AWWA Water Sustainability Conference, Portland, Oregon, March 
2012 . 

“Building Support for Rate Increases”, 2012 Central States Water Environment Association (CSWEA) 

Government Affairs Seminar, Madison, Wl, February 2012. 

“A Season on The Brink: Atlanta’s Financial Capability Based Consent Decree Extension” presented at the 201 1 
AWWA-WEF Utility Management Conference, Denver, CO, February 2011. 

“Making Wet Weather Affordable: Never Let A Good Crisis Go To Waste”, National Association of Clean Water 
Agencies Winter Conference, Fort Lauderdale, FL, January 201 1 . 

“Water Efficiency Programs: Risk Management for an Uncertain World”, Wisconsin Water Association 
Conservation Seminar, September 201 1 . 



“Financial Capability Assessment Revisited: Structuring Consent Decrees To Recognize Capital Financing 
Constraints And Market Change” presented at the 2010 AWWA-WEF Utility Management Conference, San 
Francisco, CA, February 2010. 

“Rock River Water Reclamation District Strategic Financial Planning”, Illinois Association of Wastewater 
Agencies, September 17, 2009 

“Socially Responsible Investment in Water Quality: Balancing Community Priorities and Pricing”, American Water 
Works Association Annual Conference and Exposition, Atlanta, GA, June 2009. 

“Adaptive Financial Management”, CSO Partnership, Chicago, April 2009 

“Capital Financing Strategies and Constraints: Lessons of the Political Economy ", National Association of Clean 
Water Agencies Winter Conference, Atlanta, GA, February 2009. 

“Atlanta’s Water and Wastewater System Financing: An Update", American Water Works Association Annual 
Conference and Exposition, Atlanta, GA, June 2008. 

“Inside/Outside Rates: Forthcoming Refinements in the Ml Manual”, American Water Works Association Annual 
Conference and Exposition, Atlanta, GA, June 2008. 

“Financial Capability Assessments & Affordability: Implications of EPA Criteria”, American Water Works 
Association Annual Conference and Exposition, June 2007 

“Proven Financial Management Fundamentals Demonstrated Through National & International Case Studies” 
presented at the Illinois Section, American Water Works Association conference, Springfield, IL, March 2007 

“National Trends Define Strategic Planning Imperatives,” presented at the Wisconsin Section, American Water 
Works Association conference, Wisconsin Dells, Wl, September 2006, and Wisconsin Water Environment 
Association Government Affairs seminar, Madison, Wl, March 2007. 

“Financial Capability and the Cost of Clean” presented at the National Association of Clean Water Agencies, 
Winter Conference, St. Petersburg, FL; February 2007. 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Tuesday, October 20, 2015 5:55 PM 
'Snyder, Rick (GOV)'; ‘Calley, Brian (GOV)' 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 
Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, Flint After Action 


Rich connected with Dr. Lawrence Reynolds from Flint to join our After Action team. 

He's been a long time pediatrician in Flint. Well respected in the community. 

He was affiliated with Mott Children Health Center for several years, but is listed as affiliated with Hurley now. 
His background looks excellent. He is able to join via phone tomorrow morning. 

Let me know if any concerns. 

He was suggested by Harvey and vetted by Rich. 


Old bio from 2012 here: 


7tabld/394/i' 


r-: awrence- 


Current Listing: 

htfp://health,usnevvs,corn/doctors/1avvrence-reyT:olds-4S5776 


l 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Tuesday, October 20, 2015 5:57 PM 
Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

FW: Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, Flint After Action 


FYI ~ should have included you on this. Just sent to G. 


From: Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, October 20, 2015 5:55 PM 

Cc: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) < d e m e rt f e @ m i c h iga n . go v > ; Scott, Allison (GOV) < scoftal2@rnichigan.gov >; Muchmore, 
Dennis (GOV) < rnuchrnored@michigan.gov > 

Subject: Dr. Lawrence Reynolds, Flint After Action 

Rich connected with Dr. Lawrence Reynolds from Flint to join our After Action team. 

He's been a long time pediatrician in Flint. Well respected in the community. 

He was affiliated with Mott Children Health Center for several years, but is listed as affiliated with Hurley now. 

His background looks excellent. He is able to join via phone tomorrow morning. 

Let me know if any concerns. 

He was suggested by Harvey and vetted by Rich. 


To: 'Snyder, Rick (GOV)' <J 


|; 'Calley, Brian (GOV)' ■ 


Old bio from 2012 here: 


ld/a94/itagriid/222/Dr-L3wrence-Reynolds-Honorad-bv--CFGf : .aspx 


Current Listing: 

http://hea:th.usnevvs.corn/doctors/lawrence-rev'nolds-4S5776 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Thursday, October 22, 2015 12:04 PM 
Murray, David (GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV) 

Fwd: Western Washtenaw Dems Annual Fall Fundraiser this Saturday (and more!) 


See note in email about protests today at UM. 


Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Mcbride, Bill (GOV)" < mebrideb@michi gan . gov > 

Date: October 22, 2015 at 8:17:38 AMEDT 
To: "Agen, Jarrod (GOV)" < Age nJ @m ichig a n. go v> 

Subject: Fwd: Western Washtenaw Dems Annual Fall Fundraiser this Saturday (and 
more!) 

See below about protest 


Making -he difference in local, state and national elections. 


View this email in your browser 


: 1 Right-click hvr* to i 

Li] 


To hdp protect your privacy, Outlook prevented automatic download of this pacti^e 


October 21, 2015 

A few items for your attention today. 

NOTE: Tomorrow we'll have the official announcement of our WCDP Annual Dinner which takes place 
on Sunday, November 8th. We have some exciting news that i'll reveal tomorrow so be sure to open 
that email: 

WESTERN WASHTENAW OEMS ANNUAL PALL FUNDRAISER - THIS SATURDAY! 


This Saturday, October 24th, the Western Washtenaw Dems wN hold their Annual Fall Fundraiser 
from 4-6 p.m. at the Carlyle Grill (3660 Jackson Road, Scio Township.) The even! will feature 
renowned journalist and political commentator Jack Lessenberry. He will have copies of his new book 
written with former Michigan Attorney General Frank Kelley. The People's Lawyer, The Life end Tunes 
of Frank J. Keiiey, the Nation's Longest Sen/ing Attorney General, and will be signing copies of the 
book at the end of the event. Books will oe available for purchase for $34.99. 


I * * * “i Right-click hu 


Facehook 


Website 


Events 





October 22 


Come out a no support the WVVDs so they can continue their fine work supporting Washtenaw 
Democrats. Tickets are $100 and cart be purchased at the door or ;TL::T Sponsorships are available 
at the $1,000, $500, and $250 levels. Sponsorships include tickets to the event and copy of Jack 
Lessenberry's book. Contact Kent Brown at for mors Information and to 

purchase a sponsorship 


Protest Gov. Rick Snyder in Ann Arbor T O MORROW 

A group of local activists Is planning a protest of Gov. Snyder and his policies TOMORROW. For a 


summary of some of the scandals enveloping the Snyder administration, click ; 


Here are the 


details for the orotest: 


U-M has invited Mbhiaan's Governor Rick Snyder to be a keynote speaker at an information technolop 


conference on campus, SUteiT Snyder is a far right politician who has imposed dictatorial Emergency 


Protest Gov 


Amor Meetoutsu 


BaAmsg. 91b 
Washington. Aon 
Arbor at 1:00 p.n 


October 24 •• 


Fall Fundraiser yyr 
loumnlssf sack | 
lessenberry. 4 ||| 
p m. at the Ca.dyif 


mmm-. Read m 
Ibid Township. 


14 • Democratic 
pK:SK':inl:ai 
debates. Stay 


imm for befalls | 
watch pariies i| 
ifbdibhli 
County. 


hfovember 7-8 ~ 
Am- Amor Dems 
Train to Win 
Pcs seal Brand dab 


S Campaign 

rnmmmrms 

Weekend. Click 


so. to reamer 


ano -or more 


Information. 


Idovember S I 


VVCDP Annual 
Bundrs.Wng Olnnc 
Please jo m us for 
our annual 
fnndralswg Owner 
to su sport our i 








Managers and Emergency Financial Managers on majority -poor -Black communities and school district 
in Michigan including Flint, Banian Harbor, Pontiac, Detroit, and others. In Flint, Snyder's Emergency 
Manager switched the water supply from Detroit water to Flint water in April 2014, leading to a public 
health crisis in which city water was contaminated with up to 6 times the allowable level of iead 

Snyder's brand of "innovation" .and "relentless positive action" means destroying the common good in 
Michigan. In addition to imposing Emergency Managers, in a lame-duck legislative session in 2012 he 
and his party rushed through a suite of extreme anti-choice laws, as well as union-destroying Right to 
Work laws. 

WHERE: Outside Rackham Building, 815 E Washington, Ann Arbor Mi 
WHEN: 1:00 PM Thursday October 22 

Teh U-M that Snyder end his poisonous, democracy-destroying austerity is not welcome on 
campus! 


The Washtenaw Health initiative, In conjunction with Arbor Hospice, Arbor Palliative Cars, United Way 
of Washtenaw County, and CHRT present a free screening of the Emmy-nominated documentary 
Consider the Conversation 2 The film illustrates the Importance of advance care planning In 
improving a patient's experience at the end-of-life. The event takes place Tuesday, November 17, An 
Hors d'oeuvre reception begins at 5 p.rn. followed by the program at 6 pm. Following the film will bs a 
special Q&A pane: with advance care planning experts To register, click • 



Copyright ■© 2.015 Ws&htenew County Democratic Patty, AH rights reserved. 

You are receiving Shis ernaii because you have expressed interest arid support tor the Washtenaw Co 
Democratic Party. 


Out matting address is: 


Washtenaw County Democratic Party 
2367 Bake: Rose! 

Dexter. Ml 48130 





From: 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: 

Thursday, October 22, 2015 12:30 PM 

To: 

Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: 

Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: 

RE: state money for detroit water 


Overall It works for me. 

Although; just add some urgeney/compassion. 


® We want to ensure that there are no complications or interruptions in flint residents receiving water from 
GWLA, so we are taking steps immediately wire the money to the city. They should have ail of the state funds 
within a business day or two. 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 12:16 PM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV) <bairdr@michigan.gov>; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchmored@michigan.gov>; Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV) <clemente@michigan.gov>; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov>; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 
<hollinsh@michigan.gov> 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) <MurrayDl@michigan.gov> 

Subject: RE: state money for detroit water 
Importance: High 


So sounds like based on conf call that was just had, that for some reason the city did indeed agree to ail up front. 


Clearly don't want to throw city under the bus as that's certainly not going help situation, but since having them do that 
to us as has already started, please see below bullets. Fact based and shows state's immediate action to again help 
address. Work? Any concerns or changes? 


« The initial agreement and understanding was for monthly payments. 

® Unbeknownst to the state, the city entered into an arrangement for one upfront sum and payment. 

* Now that we are aware of this and have confirmed that final arrangement, the state is taking steps to immediately 

wire the money to the city. They should have all of the state funds within a business day or two. 


Please weigh in ASAP. 


Thanks much, 
SW 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:58 AM 

To: Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@michigan.gov >; Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michigan.gov >; Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV) < dem6nte@rn8chigan.gov >; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < Ag6nj@michigan.gov >; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 
< hoilinsht@niichigan.gov > 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) < MurrayDl@m8chigan.gov > 

Subject: RE: state money for detroit water 


l 



Thanks much - that was the last I had knew and understood too about how was supposed to work. 
Just trying to either correct and nip in bud ASAP before this gets out of hand. 


But aiso imperative that we have facts first 


p.s. 

Have aiso talked with Treasury and SBO teams and they're looking into from their respective ends as well. 


From: Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:43 AM 

To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < Wurfelsfr5michigan.gov >: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michigan.gov >; Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV) < dernente@michigan.gov >; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) < AgenJ@miehigan.gov >; Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 
< hoilinsh@michigan.gov > 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) < iyiurrayDl@michigan.gov > 

Subject: RE: state money for detroit water 


The deal was monthly payments. I will get into this as quick as i can but I am sure she has it wrong or someone in DWSD 
is befuddled. 


From: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:35 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GO V); Baird, Richard (GOV); Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) 

Cc: Murray, David (GOV) 

Subject: FW: state money for detroit water 

Importance: High 


Please see below. 


No good deed goes unpunished. This iooks like may be next big issue. 


I thought GLWA-DWSD was NOT going to require the entire sum all up front? 


From: Ronald Fonger [mailto:RFQNGERl@miive.com1 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:28 AM 
To: Wurfel, Sara (GOV) < W u rf e i s @ m i ch iga n .gov > 

Subject: state money for detroit water 

Sara: 

I was at a City Council meeting last night when Flint City Administrator Natasha Henderson said the state has only wired 
Flint $2 million of the $6 million approved by the state Legislature. 

She said the city has been told it will receive an additional $2 million in January and another $2 million in April. 
Henderson said she's asked that the money be sent immediately because the city was required to pay Detroit the entire 
$12 million upfront, before the water was reconnected, and its water and sewer fund balance has dropped significantly 
as a result. 

Several council members also spoke about this, and Council President Josh Freeman called the payment plant "beyond 
ridiculous" given the city's financial position. 


2 



Is there someone who can talk to us about this? 
Thanks, 


Ron Fonger 
MLive Media Group 
Reporter 

email rfongerl(a> mliye.com 

address 540 S. Saginaw St. #101, Flint Ml 48502 


3 



From: 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: 

Thursday, October 29, 2015 10:15 AM 

To: 

Scott, Allison (GOV) 

Cc: 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Flint water 


FYI -- 1 spoke to Gov about this. 
Will update you both. 


On Oct 28, 2015, at 3:07 PM, Scott, Allison (GOV) <s cot t a 1 2 @ m i c h i g a n . g ov> wrote: 


Thoughts? 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 22, 2015 9:34 AM 
To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

Cc: Scott, Allison (GOV) < s cotta 1 2 @ m i ch \ m n . gov > 

Subject: Flint water 

Ananich wants you to add Carl Levin to the task force on Flint Water. You might want to consider 
that. Carl isn't going to go to every meeting, he's a pretty fair individual with a long relationship with 
Sikkema and Kolb, and, Ananich can hardly balk at the findings if Carl is inside the tent. 


l 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Friday, October 30, 2015 8:54 AM 
Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Fwd: Summit of North American Governors and Premiers Briefing 


What's this all about? 


Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Snyder, Rick (GOV)" < 

Date: October 30, 2015 at 12:10:51 AM EDT 

To: "Bedan, Morgan (GOV)" < 8ed«nM@roichigan,gov > 

Cc: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" < scott3 1 2 @ mi i ch I ga n . go v >, "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 

< muchmored@mlchigan J gQv >, "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" < clemente@rriichig!an,gov >, "Agen, Jarrod 
(GOV)" <AgeriJfgiriichigan.gov>, "Emmitt, Beth (GOV)" < eniiTiittb@michigan.gov >, "Dickinson, Sarah 

(GOV)" < D i c k i n s o n S@mic.hi g a n . g o v > , "Utley, Corey (GOV)" <UtlevC@niichigan.gov> 

Subject: Re: Summit of North American Governors and Premiers Briefing 

The times for the briefing are all incorrect. Will try to rely on the calendar. Also, the receptions are 
incorrect re attendance. Will be going to both receptions on Friday and only one for a half hour on Sat. 

Thanks 

Rick 

Sent from my iPad 

On Oct 29, 2015, at 12:46 PM, Bedan, Morgan (GOV) < BedanM@rolchigan,gov > wrote: 

Governor, 


Attached is your briefing for the Summit of North American Governor and Premiers. The 
briefing contains: 



For Review 

• Flint Water- Pages 59 - 62 


o Updated Action Plan 
o Updated Action Steps 


l 




Please let us know if you have any questions. 

Safe trip, 

Morgan 





From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 01, 2015 8:16 AM 
Kennedy, Jordan (GOV) 

Fwd: December 1 Daily Briefing 


Sent from my iPhone 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Snyder, Rick (GOV)" 

Date: December 1, 2015 at 7:39:15 AM EST 
To: "Bedan, Morgan (GOV)" <BedanMJBm 

Cc: "Scott, Allison (GOV)" <scott3l S.^.mschJga.Q.goy^ "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 

< muchmored@michigan.gov >. "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" < d e rn ante @ m i ch i ga n . go v > . "Agen, Jarrod 
(GOV)" < Agenj@rnichigan.gov >. "Emmitt, Beth (GOV)" < enuriittb{«)rnichigan„gov >, "Utley, Corey (GOV)" 
< UfeyC (cQ m s ch i ga n. gov > . "Dickinson, Sarah (GOV)" < PickinsonS@mtchigan.gov > 

Subject: Re: December 1 Daily Briefin 


Sent from my iPad 

On Nov 30, 2015, at 4:48 PM, Bedan, Morgan (GOV) < Beds n M (a? m i ch i ga n , go v > wrote: 


Governor, 


Attached is vour December 1 Daily Briefing. The briefing contains: 



or Review 


• Flint Water Update - Pages 25 -32 
o Action Plan Update 
o Flint Drinking Water Events Timeline 
o Eisenhower Elementary Report - Attached Separately 





Please let us know if you have any questions. 


Thank you, 

Morgan 

<DTMB Project Portfolio. pdf> 
<Eisenhower Elementary Report. pdf> 
<151201 Daily Briefing. pdf> 




From: 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Sent: 

Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:48 PM 

To: 

Brown, Jessica (GOV); Bedan, Morgan (GOV) 

Cc: 

Biehl, Laura (GOV) 

Subject: 

RE: 12/9 Radio Briefings 


Did we get updated Flint info for him? 


From: Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, December 08, 2015 2:56 PM 

To: Bedan, Morgan (GOV) <BedanM@michigan.gov> 

Cc: Biehl, Laura (GOV) <BiehlL@michigan.gov>; Agen, Jarrod (GOV) <AgenJ@michigan.gov> 
Subject: 12/9 Radio Briefings 

RDS - LIVE Radio interview with WTCM and Ron Jolly 
Time: 7:25 - 7:35 a.m. 

RDS to call: 

Call at 7:24, will go live within one minute 

Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 

Possible Topics: 

• Road Funding package 

• Energy update 

• Syrian Refugee stance 

• Pipeline Safety Committee 


Recent articles: 

Northern republicans backed road plan (Cheboygan Tribune) 

http://www.chebovgannews.com/art.ide/20151110/BLOGS/151109101 

County Commissioners wait on pipeline resolution (Petoskey News) 

http://www.eetoskevnews.eom/fe3tured-pnr/countv-commiss:oners-wa:L-on-Dipeline-resoiutlon/article 2b43079f-c4ff- 


57e2-bb9a-ccl4Se59d29c.html 

Senate leaders: Michigan energy overhaul won't happen in 2015 (MLive) 

http://vvwvvcn9ive.eom/i3nsirtsvnevvs/lndex.ssf/2015/12/senete leaders michigan energy. htrnl 

Utilities stress urgency of Michigan energy overhaul as it spills into 2016 (MLive) 

http://vvvvvvcn9ive.eom/i3nsing-nevvs/index.ssf/2015/12/utijities stress urgency of ml.html 

Despite Snyder's "pause," Syrian refugees continue to arrive in Michigan (Michigan Radio) 

" " 4chig3nfadio,pre:/pp3t/deso:te-snvder--s--D3use-svri3n-refugee3-continue-arriv-2-rnichigan#stf'eam /i ‘ i 



l 



RDS - LIVE Radio interview with WSJM and Pat Moody 
Time: 7:40 - 7:50 a.m. 

RDS to rail 

Call right at 7:40, live when phone is answered. Stay on line until phone is picked up as Pat is the only one in studio. 
Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 

Possible Topics: 

• Job creation/skilled trades in 2015 

• Education accomplishments and look-ahead 

• Road Funding package 

• Energy update 

• Syrian Refugee stance 


Recent articles: 

Road funding deal to be signed (WSJM) 

http://www.wsjm.cx3m/2015/ll/10/ro3d-furding--ds3l-t-o-be--signed/ 

Gov. Snyder wants bipartisan group to address (WSJM) 

http://www.wsim.eorn/20i5/i2/G2/aoverrsor-sriyder-warsts-bipartisan-eraup-to-address-concerns--over-refuaee- 



Last interview: 3/20/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 
Market: St. Joe/Benton Harbor- htt p://www . ws j m . c om/ 

Contact: Studio line:^^^^^HH Back-up (Pat's cell): 


RDS - TAPED Radio interview with WFNT and Jason Cooper 
Time: 7:55 - 8:05 a.m. 

RDS to call: 

Call right at 7:55, interview is taped. 


2 





Purpose: Year-end accomplishments interview. Covers 2015 highlights and 2016 look-ahead. 

Possible Topics: 

• Road Funding package 

• Flint's emergency manager exit 

• Flint water 

• Syrian refugee talks 

• Concealed carry bill re: prison guards and parole officers 

• Education accomplishments and look-ahead (if time allows) 

Recent articles: 

Flint schools slash debt by $11M, but state to review finances under new law (MLive) 

http://www.miive.com/news/fiint/index.ssf/2015/12/flint school district slashes. htmi 

Flint city attorney resigns; new mayor says she expects to name replacement (MLive) 

http://vvww.mlive.com/news/fHnt/index.ssf/2015/12/pefer ba de flint city aflorney.hfnti 

Flint Mayor Karen Waver unveils 100-day plan, including audit of city funds (MLive) 

http://www.miive.com/news/fiint/index.ssf/2015/12/j1int mayor karen weavers IDO-.htmi 

Push to recall Snyder over Flint water crisis stalls (Detroit Free Press) 

Give Flint $50M to replace lead water pipes (Detroit Free Press) 

jggisiature/75610846/ 

Last interview: 3/10/15 re: Importance of roads ballot proposal that went before voters on May 5. 

Notes: Jason Cooper< http:/Mnt.corn/Siithor/icooDer/ > WFNT's News Director and host of Conversations with Jason 
Cooper. Interview will air during Jason's show from 11-noon. 

Market: Flint and Saginaw Metro and online at htip://wfnf.corn/ 

Contact: Studio line: 


; Back-up: 



Communications Representative 
Executive Office of Michigan Governor Rick Snyder 
0: 517-335-6397 
M: 

Brownl53@rnichigan.aov 


3 




From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Tuesday, December 08, 2015 3:50 PM 
Biehl, Laura (GOV); Brown, Jessica (GOV) 

FW: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND 
ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 

2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update.pdf; What is a Part Per Billion.pdf 


Importance: 


High 


This was last night's update 


From: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) 

Sent: Monday, December 07, 2015 3:34 PM 

To: Scott, Allison (GOV) < scotta 12 @ m i ch Iga ri.gov >; Muchmore, Dennis (GO V) < rouchmored@rnichigan.gov >; Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV) < Agerd@rniehigan.gav >; Emmitt, Beth (GOV) < emmittb@roichigan.gov >; Bedan, Morgan (GO V) 
< BedanM@michigan.gov >; Baird, Richard (GOV) < bairdr@rnichigan.gov > 

Cc: Wyant, Dan (DEQ) < WvantD@michigan.gov >; Dickinson, Sarah (GOV) < DickinsonS@michigan.gov >; Edgerton, Shelly 
(LARA) < EdgertonSl@michigan.gov >; Dykema, Linda D. (DHHS) < DvkemaL@michigan,gov > 

Subject: 2015-12-07 Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update - FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGED 
Importance: High 

Dear Governor’s Office: 

Please provide the following to the Governor as a part of his daily briefing packet. If you have any 
questions, please let us know. 

• Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 

• Document on What is a Part Per Billion. 

As a reminder we will prepare these reports to you weekly, every Monday afternoon, for the previous 
week’s actions. I have also added Richard Baird to this weekly email. 

Thank you. 

Dan Wyant 
Director 


i 



Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 


FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 


Key Actions : 

On December 3, 2015, DHHS released blood lead level testing data. The data covered 
the time frame between January 1 , 201 0, and November 1 3, 2015. The data was 
broken down by population set and by demographic. The population sets included the 
state of Michigan as a whole, Genesee County as a whole, and the city of Flint ZIP 
Codes 48501 to 48507. The demographic sets broke the populations down into the age 
groups of: “Children younger than 6 Years Old,” “Children 6 to 17 Years Old,” “Adults 18 
Years and Older,” and “Total Number of People of All Ages Tested.” 

On December 3, 2015, the DEQ released the lead in drinking water data and final report 
for Eisenhower Elementary School. The findings in the report were very similar in 
nature to those found in the report for Freeman Elementary School. There were a 
number of fixtures and plumbing immediately adjacent to fixtures that were imparting 
lead into the water. The report recommends replacement of these fixtures and related 
plumbing. 

On December 4 and 5, 2015, staff from the DEQ and DLARA conducted a plumbing 
evaluation and subsequent sampling of the fixtures used for drinking water consumption 
at Potter Elementary School in Flint. There were a total number of 288 samples taken 
at 57 different locations throughout the school. 

Positions : 

There are no new positions to report since last week. 

Concerns : 

There are no new concerns to report since last week. 

Significant Events : 

On November 30, 2015, Director Dan Wyant and George Krisztian met with water 
quality expert Dr. Joan Rose of Michigan State University. The purpose of the meeting 
was to discuss the situation in Flint and to seek guidance on approaches for addressing 
the issue. Dr. Rose expressed that she felt there were three different fronts necessary 
to address the issue. These were to create a “Trust Plan,” a “Communications Plan,” 
and a plan to “Get the lead out.” Dr. Rose provided several different examples of 
communities that had undergone similar challenges and what approaches worked and 
what approaches did not. 




FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 2 


On December 3, 2015, representatives from the Governor’s office, DEQ, and Office of 
Urban Initiatives met with Flint City Mayor Karen Weaver and members of her transition 
team. The purpose of the meeting was primarily introductory in nature, and the 
conversations were at a high level discussing the needs of the city as well as how 
communications with the residents of the city could be improved. There was also 
discussion of the lead testing results, both for home owners and in the schools. There 
was particular interest in the sampling protocol that was used to obtain samples in the 
schools. Overall, the conversation was very positive, with everyone agreeing that a 
coordinated effort was necessary to be able to effectively address the lead issue. 

On December 3, 201 5, Director Dan Wyant was interviewed by Lori Jane Gliha for a 
segment on America Tonight. The questions mainly focused on what had happened in 
the past and were tough. The responses echoed the message that the DEQ 
empathizes with the residents of Flint; we are committed to bringing about a resolution; 
we have a plan; we are moving forward; and we recognize that we need to rebuild trust 
in the community. 

On December 4, 2015, representatives of the DEQ (Jim Sygo, Karen Tommasulo, and 
George Krisztian) met with Flint Mayor Karen Weaver and other city officials for the 
weekly coordination meeting. Calling into the meeting were representatives of DHHS 
and DLARA. The blood lead data that DHHS released the previous day was discussed, 
and Dr. Eden Wells provided detailed comment on the data. There was also detailed 
discussion regarding the Revolving Loan Fund and how it might be utilized to help 
address the issue of lead service line replacement. 

On December 4, 2015, representatives of the DEQ (Jim Sygo, Karen Tommasulo, and 
George Krisztian) met with Flint Community Schools Superintendent Bilal Tawwab. The 
main topic of discussion was a review of the lead in drinking water data obtained to 
date. Superintendent Tawwab was informed that the schools, in general, were all 
following a similar pattern in that the sources of lead appear to be coming primarily from 
fixtures and the adjacent plumbing. Superintendent Tawwab indicated that his office 
has already made the decision to follow all recommendations in the reports. It was also 
agreed that a monthly meeting would be helpful to ensure that the process kept moving 
forward. In addition, there was discussion about a document that the DEQ would create 
that would explain what constituted a part per billion or ppb. A draft document without 
graphics was given to Superintendent Tawwab, and he indicated that the final version 
would be a very helpful aid to parents and students. 

Changes from Previous Report : 

• Draft sampling instructions were developed for lead and copper compliance 

sampling, incorporating comments by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA). The revised document is being sent back to the EPA for final comment. 



FOIA EXEMPT AND ATTORNEY-CLIENT PRIVILEGE 

Flint Drinking Water Action Plan Update 
Page 3 


• DEQ staff met with DHHS staff to assist with development of a phosphate fact 
sheet. DHHS is the lead on this and will be submitting a revised version to the 
DEQ for final comment. This document is being developed to answer home 
owner questions regarding the safety of the addition of phosphate to the water 
received by the city of Flint from Detroit. 

• Staff from the DEQ provided a “Standby Operations” letter to the city of Flint. 

The purpose of the letter is to define what practices are to be utilized in the event 
of an emergency. 

• Staff from the DEQ followed up with the city of Flint on the status of the 
installation of corrosion control treatment. Pumps were installed on 
November 30, 201 5. It is anticipated that the startup of the system will begin 
during the week of December 7, 201 5. 

Other Item : 

Attached is the draft document, “What is a Part per Billion.” 


Prepared by: George Krisztian, Flint Action Plan Coordinator 
Laboratory Director 
Department of Environmental Quality 



December 7, 2015 


What is a Part per Billion? 


1 dollar in a stack of 1 dollar bills 62 miles high 
1 dime in a stack of dimes 800 miles high 
1 penny in 10 million dollars 
1 second in 32 years 
1 foot of a trip to the moon 

1 inch of a trip from the North Pole to the South Pole 

1 apple in over 10,000 truckloads 

1 drop of water in 850 aquariums 20 gallons in size 

1 single pitch from every game, of every major league baseball 
team, played over the course of 700 seasons 



Subject: 

RDS/GT/VB - KWA & DWSD (Water) Meeting 

Location: 

Governor's SE MI Office 

Start: 

Fri 4/19/2013 3:00 PM 

End: 

Fri 4/19/2013 4:30 PM 

Recurrence: 

(none) 

Meeting Status: 

Accepted 

Organizer: 

GovCalendar 

Required Attendees: 

Hichez, Amy (Treasury); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Rustem 
William (GOV); Brader, Valerie (GOV); Tedder, Greg (GOV) 

Optional Attendees: 

Clayton, Stacie (GOV); Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ) 



Attendees: 

RDS/GT in person, Val Brader by phone 
Mr. Orr by phone 

Harvey Hollins by phone or in person 

Attending from DWSD: Jim Fausone, Sue McCormick (Director), Nikki Bateson (CFO) 

Attending from Flint: Ed Kurtz and Flint Mayor Dayne Walling 

Attending from Treasury: Andy Dillon, Amy Hichez 

Attending from DEQ: Dan Wyant 

George Karmo from Tucker Young Jackson Tull Inc 


l 



Subject: 

Location: 


Internal Flint Water Meeting 

Governor's Conference Room, 2nd Romney 


Start: 

End: 


Wed 1/28/2015 10:00 AM 
Wed 1/28/2015 11:00 AM 


Recurrence: 


(none) 


Meeting Status: 


Accepted 


Organizer: 

Required Attendees: 


Posthumus, Dick (GOV) 

Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV); Wisniewski, 
Wendy (GOV); Hall, Jean (GOV); Pleyte, Beth (Treasury); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Murray, David (GOV) 


Attending: 

Dick Posthumus 
Dennis Muchmore 
John Walsh 
Beth Clement 
Tom Saxton 
Harvey Hollins 
Dave Murray 


l 



Subject: 


DM/EC/HH/Wayne Workman/ Tom Saxton/ Ashley Gelisse RE: Flint Pastors Warn 
They'll Go To Court To Get City Off Flint River Water 
Location: Governor's Conference Room, 2nd Floor Romney 


Start: 

End: 


Tue 4/14/2015 11:00 AM 
Tue 4/14/2015 12:00 PM 


Recurrence: 


(none) 


Meeting Status: 


Accepted 


Organizer: 

Required Attendees: 


Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); 
Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Gelisse, Ashley (TREASURY); Cousineau, Sara (Treasury); Pleyte, 
Beth (Treasury); Clayton, Stacie (GOV); Dempkowski, Angela (Treasury) 


Attendees: 
EC/DM/HH 
Wayne Workman 
Tom Saxton 
Ashley Gelisse 


From: Gelisse, Ashley (TREASURY) 

Sent: Thursday, April 09, 2015 2:58 PM 

To: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Cousineau, Sara (Treasury); Pleyte, 
Beth (Treasury); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Stoken, Laura (GOV) 

Subject: RE: Flint Pastors Warn They'll Go To Court To Get City Off Flint River Water 

Wayne and I discussed this further, i think it would be good if this group could meet early next week to have another 
discussion on Flint. 


The purpose of the meeting would be to discuss and finalize Flint RTAB members, and aiso to discuss the potential 
ramifications of Rep. Kildee's recommendation that the state forgive Flint's $22M water loan: 
http://www.mlive.com/news/fiint/index.ssf/2Q15/04/kiidee asks feds about forgive. htm I 


If you agree, perhaps Wendy (or Laura, in her absence) and Beth can heip us find some time. Thanks much. 


Ashley 


From: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Sent: Wednesday, April 08, 2015 6:40 PM 
To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Stanton, Terry A. (Treasury); Gelisse, Ashley (TREASURY); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); 


l 



Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: Re: Flint Pastors Warn They'll Go To Court To Get City Off Flint River Water 

It is timely to figure that out, because what they is not affordable and they are ignoring the new improvements 
announced today. 

Sent from my iPad 

On Apr 8, 2015, at 5:27 PM, "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" < rriuchmored {Simiehigan.gov > wrote: 

Why not, we haven't anything else to do except spend our time chasing our tail. This issue isn't going to go away until 
we do some serious comms work in the city. 


From: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Sent: Wednesday, April 08, 2015 5:13 PM 

To: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Stanton, Terry A. (Treasury); Gelisse, Ashley (TREASURY); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); 
Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: Flint Pastors Warn They'll Go To Court To Get City Off Flint River Water 
FYl 

Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Koryzno, Edward (Treasury)" < KorvznoE@michigan.gov > 

Date: April 8, 2015 at 4:35:47 PM EDT 

To: "Workman, Wayne (TREASURY)" < Workman W@michig3n.gov >, "Gelisse, Ashley (TREASURY)" 

< Geh'sseA@michigan.gov > 

Subject: FW: Flint Pastors Warn They'll Go To Court To Get City Off Flint River Water 

FYl 


Edward B. Koryzno, Jr. j Director - Bureau of Local sSovernment Services 
State of Michigan i 430 W. Allegan Street, 3rd Floor j Lansing, MI 48922 

<image001.jpg> < 517 ) 373 ~ 4415 ' < 517 ) 373 -° 633 (*«) 

KoryznoE@michiqari.gov 



Think Greed Don't print this e-mail unless you need to. 


CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: This e-mail, and any attachments,, is for the sole use of the intended recipient(s) 
and may contain information that is confidential and protected from disclosure under the law. Any unauthorized 
review, use, disclosure, or distribution is prohibited. If you are not the intended recipient, please contact the 
sender by reply e-mail, and delete/destroy all copies of the original message and attachments. 

Thank you 


From: Widigan, Robert (TREASURY) 

Sent: Wednesday, April 08, 2015 4:12 PM 

To: Koryzno, Edward (Treasury); Byrne, Randall (Treasury); Cline, Richard (Treasury); Vandegrift, Drew (TREASURY) 
Subject: Flint Pastors Warn They'll Go To Court To Get City Off Flint River Water 

Importance: Low 


2 



FYI - http://videos.rriljve.com/mnve/2015/04/fnnt pastors warn theyil go t.htrni 


Robert Wsdsg ars | Office of Fiscal Responsibility 
State of Michigan | Department of Treasury 
430 W. Allegan Street | Lansing, Ml 48922 
Office (517) 335-2130 | 


Subject: 

RDS - Urban Initiatives Update 

Location: 

Governor's SE MI Office 

Start: 

Mon 9/21/2015 2:00 PM 

End: 

Mon 9/21/2015 2:30 PM 

Recurrence: 

(none) 

Meeting Status: 

Accepted 

Organizer: 

GovCalendar 

Required Attendees: 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Clayton, Stacie (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Optional Attendees: 

Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Agenda: 




1 


Subject: 

Location: 


RDS/DM/BM/NL/DW/Maggie Pallone/Karen Tommasulo/Col. Etue & Lt. Col. 
Sands/HH/DMurray/TSaxton - Meeting Re: Flint Water 
Governor's Conference Room, Romney 


Start: 

End: 


Tue 9/29/2015 1:00 PM 
Tue 9/29/2015 1:30 PM 


Recurrence: 


(none) 


Meeting Status: 


Accepted 


Organizer: 

Required Attendees: 


Optional Attendees: 


GovCalendar 

Mcbride, Bill (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Lyon, Nick 
(DCH); Grijalva, Nancy (DCH); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ); Etue, Kriste 
(MSP); Klotz, Josephine (MSP); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Clayton, Stacie (GOV); Hansen, 
Rachel (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Adamczyk, Lynne (GOV); Sands, Thomas (MSP) 
Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 



HH by Phone 



l 



Subject: FW: RDS/GT/VB - KWA & DWSD (Water) Meeting 

Location: Governor's SE Ml Office 


Start: 

End: 

Show Time As: 


Fri 4/19/2013 2:00 PM 
Fri 4/19/2013 3:30 PM 
Tentative 


Recurrence: 
Meeting Status: 
Organizer: 


(none) 

Not yet responded 
GovCalendar 


Original Appointment 

From: Emmitt, Beth (GOV) On Behalf Of GovCalendar 
Sent: Thursday, April 18, 2013 1:42 PM 

To: GovCalendar; Hichez, Amy (Treasury); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Rustem, William (GOV); 
Brader, Valerie (GOV); Tedder, Greg (GOV) 

Cc: Clayton, Stacie (GOV); Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ) 

Subject: RDS/GT/VB - KWA & DWSD (Water) Meeting 

When: Friday, April 19, 2013 3:00 PM-4:30 PM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada). 

Where: Governor's SE MI Office 



Attendees: 

RDS/GT in person, Val Brader by phone 
Mr. Orr by phone 

Harvey Hollins by phone or in person 

Attending from DWSD: Jim Fausone, Sue McComerick (Director), Nikki Bateson (CFO) Attending from Flint: Ed Kurtz (he 
is sending his attendee list over shortly) 

Attending from Treasury: Andy Dillon 



Subject: 

Location: 

Start: 

End: 

Show Time As: 
Recurrence: 
Meeting Status: 
Organizer: 


RDS/GT/VB - KWA & DWSD (Water) Meeting 
Governor's SE Ml Office 

Fri 4/19/2013 5:30 PM 
Fri 4/19/2013 7:00 PM 
Tentative 

(none) 

Not yet responded 
GOVSecurity2 




SClayton to dial in as Host 


Attendees: 

RDS/GT in person, Val Brader by phone 
Mr. Orr by phone 

Harvey Hollins by phone or in person 

Attending from DWSD: Jim Fausone, Sue McCormick (Director), Nikki Bateson (CFO) 

Attending from Flint: Ed Kurtz and Flint Mayor Dayne Walling 

Attending from Treasury: Andy Dillon, Amy Hichez 

Attending from DEQ: Dan Wyant 

George Karmo from Tucker Young Jackson Tull Inc 


i 



Subject: 

Location: 


RDS/GT/VB - KWA & DWSD (Water) Meeting 
Governor's SE Ml Office 


Start: Fri 4/19/2013 2:00 PM 

End: Fri 4/19/2013 3:30 PM 

Show Time As: Tentative 

Recurrence: (none) 

Meeting Status: Not yet responded 

Organizer: GovCalendar 

Required Attendees: Hichez, Amy (Treasury); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Rustem, 

William (GOV); Brader, Valerie (GOV); Tedder, Greg (GOV) 

Optional Attendees: Clayton, Stacie (GOV); Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ) 


MHW- SClayton to dial in as Host 
Attendees: 

RDS/GT in person, Val Brader by phone 
Mr. Orr by phone 

Harvey Hollins by phone or in person 

Attending from DWSD: Jim Fausone, Sue McCormick (Director), Nikki Bateson (CFO) 

Attending from Flint: Ed Kurtz and Flint Mayor Dayne Walling 

Attending from Treasury: Andy Dillon, Amy Hichez 

Attending from DEQ: Dan Wyant 

George Karmo from Tucker Young Jackson Tull Inc 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Gelisse, Ashley (TREASURY) 

Monday, February 02, 2015 3:08 PM 

Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Muchmore, 
Dennis (GOV); Allard, Claire (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 
Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Stanton, Terry A. (Treasury) 

Independent Water Analysis - Flint 
Independent Water Analysis.PDF 


FYS only - a helpful article about the water situation in Flint, offers a good independent assessment. Thanks. 
Ashley Gelisse 

Senior Policy Advisor to State Treasurer Kevin Clinton 

Richard H. Austin Building 

430 West Allegan Street 

Lansing, Ml 48922 

Direct: 517-241-2474 



gelissea@michigan.gov 


l 



iKUMtto; a«v u investigates: wnsrs in your water / - AtsO u ~wjk s -curs, tvt i 



ABC 12 Investigates: What's in your water? 

Posted; Jdii 29. 2015 3;38 PM BST 
Updated: Jan 29, 201& limmEST 

By Larry Elliott . j" " CONNECT ) 

FUN I (WJRT) (01T29/iS : J- the resuitsareln aftd We now have a completely ihdep.hdenffedK at what's in 
Flint’s water su pply. 

For t&e Ftint Biyeras it’s wafer source, Flint wafer 

customers have complained of smelly, cloudy; bad tasting water and blame lifora variety of health 
problems. 

Complaints exploded earlier this month when Flint ncstlf ed its wafer customer:, fiat a group of chemicals 
known as TTHM were at much higher average- levels than allowed by jaw. 

With so many questions and distrust of the answers, ABC12‘s Larry Elliott investigates - What's in vour 
Water? 

It seems no matter who you ask in the Riot area, there's an opinion about the city’s water. Most o? She issues.; 
center on the quality of the water and whether it's safe to drink. 

"Right now it smeiis,'' said Flint resident Lee Miller. “We’re getting tyator oat of our own bank yard now arid ifs 
costing me doable what it was coming from Detroit." 

"i! has a funny taste to it." said Flint resident Milton Alexander. 

"It couid be dangerous to os. actually ! don't know how dangerous ii is," said Flint resident Sbarika Sanders. 

'I’m no cheerleader for the water department here, ithi nk we've got a tot of issues to wo rk on." Ken 
VanWagoner, of Good Beans Cafe - Flint. 

Most of the issues center on the quality of the wars' arid whether ifs safe to drink, but concern over its safety 
reached a new high earlier this month when the city was required by the slate Department of Environmental 
Quality to notify residents that the water had exceeded the allowable limit of a group of chemicais known as 
TTHM 

TTHM is in most municipal water systems and is thought by some to be a possible card nog so in. tong term 
: exposure; 

It's a byproduct of cbtonriatianywhich 1 is asmmonly used to help purify water. Last August, as Flint's water 
treatment plant worked to purify the water it was drawing from ins Flint River, levels of TTHM grew to wet! 
ove r the ERA allowed maximum . 

August test results provided by the DEQ to ABC 12 show all of the eight testing sites around Flint had TTHM 
levels well above the legal limit. 

The lowest level among the eight sites was 40 percent above the iegaf limit. The highest was MS percent 






[MU/ZU’ID 


abuiz investigates: vvnars in your water' - Atsu, iz-vvji-c i -runt, ivn 


more than allowed. 

DEQ rules only require the city to report higher than allowed levels to the public once a year, and only if the 
average of quarterly tests is higher than the legal limit 

That notification wentout to residents on Jan. 5. Since then, many residents have refused to believe 
assurances from the DEQ and the city that the water is now safe to drink. 

So, we set out to do complete and independent testing to find out for ourselves exactly what's in yourwater. 

It took a bit of research, but we finally found Water Tech, in Howell, a testing lab with absolutely no ties to 
Flint, just to make sure there are no questions about the test results. 

After having Water Tech train ABC12's Larry Elliott on the proper methods for collecting water samples, we 
set out last week to randomly test five sites in Flint. 

1. Downtown. 

"I'm excited to see this done because this is an independent way to find out that everything's just fine," 
VanWagonersaid. 

2. The north side. 

"We'd like to do kind ofa whole battery oftests of your water. Oh yeah," Alexander said. 

3. The west side. 

"It could be dangerous to us. How about if we help you find out what's in it right now?" Sanders said. 

4. The east side. 

"I'm hoping for a good test and put my family at ease," Miller said. 

5. Our main studio, on the south side. 

We also wanted to compare whatever we're to find with Detroit supplied water, so we took a sample from the 
Burton water system. 

Since next year Flint will connect to the new KWApipeline, getting its waterfrom Lake Huron, we tooka 
comparison sample from the Saginaw-Midland water system, which currently uses Lake Huron water. 

We tested all the sites for levels of TTHM. We also tested how much residual chlorine was in the Flint and 
Burton water supply and more importantly, we tested at two of our Flint sites for a number of other hazardous 
chemicals that could cause skin or other health problems. 

Tests for those other chemicals are not required for public water systems, but we decided to run those tests 
anyway. 

Here's what our independent testing shows: 

All sites tested, including the Saginaw-Midland water system and the Burton system, using Detroit water, 
contained TTHM - butall of them were well below the EPA allowed maximum. 

Saginaw-Midland water had less than a third of the maximum TTHM allowed, the Burton system had only 
about 25 percent ofthe maximum and the highest level found of all of our Flint tests showed just over 65 
percent of whafs allowed, all below EPA limits. 

A similar byproduct of chlorination, haloacetic acids, was also well below EPA maximums in Flint's water. 

We tested Flint’s north and east water samples for many other hazardous chemicals that a doctor told us 
could cause skin or other health problems, and on both tests, not a single one of those chemicals was 
detected. 

Since most often any smell to the water would be caused by levels of total residua! chlorine, we tested that 
too, in both our Fiintand Burton samples. 

The legal limit is 4 milligrams per liter. The average of our Flint samples shows a level of about a half 
milligram per liter. Our test in Burton actually shows 22 percent more residual chlorine than Flint. 

Our Flint sample also showed no Coliform bacteria. 

We asked Chris McCarthy, of Water Tech, a few questions. 


ht+rv/JWwiAj ci Km 10 /-v-u-n/ct^rw/97Q7filn#/ahr , 19-in\/<actfnafoc-iArHafc_irk-\/m ir_mrafor 


OtA 



•l/JU/<£UID 


rtbu’i^ invesugaies: vvnars in your water ' - Atso ia - vvjk i — i-iim, mi 


Q: How would you describe these test results? 

A: "Well, for the samples received, the tests we performed, everything is within EPA guidelines for safe 
drinking water." 

Q: Is there anything in these results that raises a red flag for you? 

A: "For water quality or water safety, No.” 

We then asked residents if these results change their opinion of what they'll do with their water now. 

"To be honest, no," Alexander said. 

"It will make me feel a lot more comfortable about bathing and brushing my teeth in it, but I'm still not going to 
drink it and I'm not gonna give it to my kids or my dog," Sanders said. 

"It makes me feel a lot more safer, a lot more comfortable knowing that it's safe to drink now, you know. I'll tell 
you a load lifted off my shoulders. When the kids take baths, when my wife takes a shower, you know, I know 
now we're safe," Miller said. 

So what about those whoVe stood before Flint City Council with jugs of discolored water? 

While Genesee County Drain Commissioner Jeff Wright points out he has no jurisdiction over Flint's water 
system, he says in general, discolored water like this is nearly always the result of water main breaks or 
repairs, and Flint has more than its share because of its aging system. 

Wright also says the KWA pipeline won't change that. It will take better management of repairs and money - 
lots of it- to replace Flint's aging water mains. 

Unfortunately for the city of Flint, those very high levels of TTHM recorded last August in Flint water tests are 
still required by the DEQto be included in the next report calculating average TTHM levels. 

The next test will be done next week, and city Public Works Director Howard Croft tells ABC12, because of 
the high levels last August, the city will again be found in violation and will be required by the DEQto send 
out another TTHM notice of violation to all Flint water customers in early March, even if all new tests show 
levels under the legal limit. 

To view the TTHM testing results from the Michigan DEQ, click HERE . 

To view the results of ABC12's water tests, click on the location you'd like to see results for below: 

Flint Center 


Flint North 


Flint East 
Flint South 
Flint West 
Burton 

Saainaw-Midland 

To view the Michigan DEQ results for South Flint, click HERE . 


httrv//i*mru/ ahr'1 9 rnm /cfr\r\//97Q7ft1 fW/ahv'l 9_i rt\ /oc ti n a f oc_\a t h at c_ i n_\/r\t jr_*» rotor 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Wednesday, February 11, 2015 9:12 AM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

FW: PRESS RELEASE: Water Consultant Announcement 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, February 11, 2015 9:11:45 AM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada) 
To: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Stanton, Terry A. (Treasury); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
Subject: RE: PRESS RELEASE: Water Consultant Announcement 


I need something more substantive that we can get to the community about the rates and costs today. 


From: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) 

Sent: Wednesday, February 11, 2015 6:09 AM 
To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Stanton, Terry A. (Treasury); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: PRESS RELEASE: Water Consultant Announcement 

see the press release below re the water consultant. In the conversation Wayne & 1 had with Jerry late 
yesterday they are apparently planning a public forum mtg of some type next week to share preliminary results 
of the consultant's work. Veolia has already been doing some work on this. 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: Gerald Ambrose < gambrose@cityotflint.com > 

Date: February 10, 2015 at 9: 13:45 PM EST 

To: "Thomas Saxton (Treasury)" <SaxtonT @ michi g an. go v>. "Wayne Workman 
(TREASURY)" <v /or kmanw@,mic hi gan . gov > 

Subject: Fwd: PRESS RELEASE: Water Consultant Announcement 

Just in case you did not see this. Had a roundtable with media and Veolia. 

Forwarded message 

From: "Jason Lorenz" < j l orenz @c it y offlint.com> 

Date: Feb 10, 2015 2:56 PM 

Subject: PRESS RELEASE: Water Consultant Announcement 
To: 

Cc: 

For Immediate Release 

Flint Hires International Urban Water Experts of 
Veolia North America to Assess City’s Water Issues 


i 



Flint, Michigan - February 10, 2015 - The City of Flint has retained a team of urban water experts 
from Veolia North America to conduct an analysis of the city’s water system. Veolia, which is 
the world’s largest water services and technology company, will assess how Flint’s water is 
tested and distributed, including reviewing water treatment processes and operations, laboratory 
testing and analysis, and engineering reports that detail the city’s treatment and distribution 
systems. 

“We understand the frustration and urgency in Flint,” said David Gadis, vice president of Veolia 
North America’s Municipal & Commercial Business. “We are honored to support your 
community with our technical expertise so that together we can ensure water quality for the 
people of the city of Flint.” 

Veolia anticipates its analysis to take less than two weeks, at which time they will present 
findings to City officials, including the Mayor, City Council and the Emergency Manager. Once 
the findings are presented, city officials will determine how to move forward. 

"Addressing the City's water challenges are the top priority right now and it is important to bring 
in an independent, highly qualified team to work with us to address the safety and quality 
issues,” said Mayor Dayne Walling. 

“Until we have completed our analysis, we cannot say for certain how long it will take to provide 
solutions to Flint’s current water situation,” said Gadis. “We have extensive experience handling 
challenging river water sources, reducing leaks and contaminants and in managing discolored 
water.” 

“Veolia worked diligently to respond to our Request For Proposal in a thorough, professional 
way and demonstrated the ability to immediately support us as we ensure safe, clean water for 
our residents,” said Emergency Manager Jerry Ambrose. 

The Veolia team hit the ground running Tuesday morning, meeting with water officials to 
provide an overview of the work to be conducted. “We look forward to helping Flint’s team find 
ways to address and improve the city’s drinking water operation,” Gadis said. 

The company designs and provides water, waste and energy management solutions to 
communities and industries across the country, including providing water and wastewater 
services to 530 communities in North America. More information is available at 

www. veolianorthamerica . com. 


-END- 


2 



-Jason Lorenz 
Public Information Officer 
City of Flint 
( 810 ) 237-2039 

i io r e nz @dty ofnint.com 


3 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Monday, February 16, 2015 12:42 PM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

FW: Flint Water Bills 

Water Forum - Final. ppt; WATER RATES deposits.doc 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, February 16, 2015 12:41:53 PM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada) 
To: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: FW: Flint Water Bills 


1'bis is an old note which summarizes some of the early issues with the system and why they wanted to go to the 
KWA. Thought you might be interested. Did we get any info for the ministers about how the Detroit bill extensions and 
cut offs are working? 


From: Stibitz, Brom (Treasury) 

Sent: Monday, March 04, 2013 4:00 PM 
To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Cc: Dillon, Andy (Treasury) 

Subject: Flint Water Bills 

Dennis, 

There is some information attached on the Flint water issue you asked us about. I summarize a few of the key 
points: 

• The water system has been running at deficits for years. When the previous EFM left the City in 2004, the 
water system has a reserve of approximately $60 million. When Mike Brown was appointed, this had turned 
into a $20 million deficit due to years of not passing along to consumers the rate increases of over 10% 
hitting the system from DWSD. Slides 5 & 6 of the attached power point show this pretty dramatically. 

• Substantial increases over the past few years are an attempt to reflect the actual costs of running the system. 

• Another concern raised by DHS was the increase in the deposit for rental properties. This was necessary 
because renters paid the previous $100 deposit, then racked up water bills in excess of this amount and 
walked away. Of the affidavits currently out there, 82% are past due. I would also note that this is not 
mandatory, it is only required if a landlord is not willing to put the water bill in their name. 

• The bottom line is that they realize it is an issue, but the General Fund doesn’t have the money to run 
general City operations, much less subsidize water rates. 

The two page word document (attached) provided by the EFM gives you a good overview of what is going on. 

They believe that a switch to KWA is part of the solution for high water rates in the City. 

Brom 


l 





City Of Flint Water Forum 


CONTENTS 


Water History Facts 3 

Frequently Asked Questions 4 

Budget Allocation and Fund Expenses 5 

Asset / Revenue Charts 6 

Recent Timeline of Water and Sewer Funds 7 

City of Flint - Water and Sewer System Additional Asset / Revenue Data 8 

Calculation of Water and Sewer Rates for FY13 Budget 9 

Example Water Bill 10 

Turn-off Policy 11 

Preliminary Options for Future City of Flint Water Sources 12 

Improvements for City of Flint Water System 13 


2 



City Of Flint Water History Facts 


Current Treatment Plant was put into service in 1954. 

Current 72” main pipeline was completed in 1970. 

Flint signed a 30 year contract with Detroit Water and Sewer Department in the mid 1 960’s. 

The contract with DWSD has expired and we are currently operating on a yearly extension. 

In 2006 Flint completed a $48,000,000 upgrade of the existing Water Plant (required by the MDEQ & for backup only). 

Flint’s Water & Sewer System is approximately a $300,000,000 Enterprise. 

Flint’s Water & Sewer System is designed to deliver water to over 200,000 people with over 1 ,500 miles of infrastructure. 
Flint’s most recent census count shows a population of approximately 1 02,000 in 201 0. 

Flint’s census population in 2000 was approximately 124,000. 

The water system had over 45,000 customers in June of 1999. 

The water system had just over 36,000 customers by June 2011 . 

The “Fixed Costs” that must be covered to maintain the system and deliver quality water have increased over time. 



City Of Flint 

Most Frequently Asked Questions about Water 


□Why are the water rates so high ? 

□How does my water bill work (Explanation of charges) ? 

□Why do others in the area pay less for the same amount of water ? 
□Where has all of the water and sewer fund money gone ? 

□What do I do if I think my bill is incorrect ? 

□What effect does leakage or theft have on my bill ? 

□How can I report water theft ? 

□Why don’t we go back to using the Flint River like we once did ? 



City of Flint 

Budget Allocation and Fund Expenses 



Audited 

2007 Actual 2008 Actual 2009 Actual 2010 Actual 2011 Actual 2012 Projected 2013 Budget 


Operating Revenues 

51,090,679 

51,100,332 

51,906,553 

47,926,589 

54,385,644 

67,983,044 

81,734,552 

Other Revenues 

2,627,939 

3,274,450 

1,442,383 

764,886 

68,645 

126,670 

455,867 

Annual Revenues 

53,718,618 

54,374,782 

53,348,936 

48,691,475 

54,454,289 

68,109,714 

82,190,419 


Water Purchased 

16,052,006 

16,297,871 

17,421,663 

17,103,752 

20,919,987 

21,756,787 

24,031,417 

Personnel Costs 

17,292,444 

26,302,590 

27,591,206 

28,149,946 

28,618,817 

29,640,499 

28,546,350 

Operating Expenses 

5,355,638 

6,145,119 

6,950,534 

8,146,390 

6,917,964 

6,420,260 

7,259,290 

Administrative Expenses 

21,300,900 

4,229,382 

3,403,231 

7,327,630 

6,221,627 

11,465,462 

14,140,047 

Depreciation 

7,217,142 

7,132,870 

8,364,022 

8,854,889 

8,689,809 

8,615,000 

7,500,000 

Interest Expense 

86,632 

485,499 

868,031 

812,270 

754,890 

705,150 

644,314 

Transfers to Other Funds 

- 

- 

2,990,000 

2,990,000 

2,990,000 

2,990,000 

2,990,000 

Annual Expenses 

67,304,762 

60,593,331 

67,588,687 

73,384,877 

75,113,094 

81,593,158 

85,111,418 


5 











City of Flint 

Recent Timeline of Water and Sewer Funds 
FY 2007 through 2013 















City of Flint- Water and Sewer System Additional Asset / Revenue Data 


The average annual residential water sewer bill in FY2005 was less than $700 annually 
The average annual residential water/ sewer bill in FY13 will be nearly $1,700 

Expenses have exceeded revenues every year since 200S: 


Revenues Unreserved FACTORS 


FISCAL 

YEAR 

Rate 

Base 

Revenues 

Expenses 

Minus 

Expenses 

System 

Equity 

IMPACTING 

SOLVENCY 



COST 

IMPACT 

2006 

2005 

$55,204,242 

$50,933,792 

$4,270,450 

$60,340,013 














(millions) 

2007 

2005 

$53,856,857 

$67,442,993 

($13,586,136) 

$46,399,452 

No rate adjustment 



?? 







$15.7 million lawsuit settlement 

15.7 

0 

$15.7 

2008 

2005 

$54,374,781 

$60,593,331 

($6,218,550) 

$36,482,488 

No rate adjustment 



?? 







OPEB liabilities added 

3.6 

2.7 

$6.3 

2009 

2009 

$53,488,463 

$67,728,218 

($14,239,755) 

$24,023,065 

ROE payment added as part of City [ 

1.9 

1.1 

$3.0 

2010 

2009 

$48,820,329 

$73,513,725 

($24,693,396) 

$3,531,768 

No rate adjustment 



?? 







Use of retained earnings budgeted 

12.5 

0.5 

$13.0 







Revenue lost due to recession 

2 

2 

$4.0 

2011 

2011 

$54,527,079 

$75,185,879 

($20,658,800) 

($12,866,607) 

Use of retained earnings budgeted 

7.1 

3.5 

$10.6 


2011 





Water purchase cost increase 

0 

3.8 

$3.8 

2012 


$68,279,187 

$83,682,840 

($15,403,653) 

($20,884,122) 

Use of retained earnings budgeted 

5.1 

0 

$5.1 







Water purchase cost increase 

0 

0.8 

$0.8 

2013 

2013 

$82,220,420 

$90,970,420 

($8,750,000) 

($23,379,690) 

Water purchase cost increase 

0 

2.3 

$2.3 







RHC/Legal/ Admin Cost Allocation 

2.1 

1.5 

$3.6 


$68.2 


($99,279,840) 







Calculation of Water and Sewer Rates for FY13 Budget 


March, 2012: 


Water 

Sewer 

TOTAL 


Expense 
Projection 
Based on 
FY1 2 
Costs 

Revenue 
Projection 
Based on 
FY12 
Receipts 

Difference 
Between 
Projected 
Revenues and 
Expenses 

Rate 
Increase 
Necessary 
To Close ! 
Gap 

$49.9 

$44.4 

-$5.5 

12.4% 

$31.0 

$21.4 

-$9.6 

44.9% 

$80.9 

$65.8 

-$15.1 

22.9% 













CITY of FLINT, MICHIGAN 
WATER &/OR SEWER BILL 


Santee at SSI 0 BALDWIN BLVP 


3419 

ACCOUNT NUMBER 

6 AL 0 - 0 Q 5 S 1 0 - 0000-01 


RETUSftJj TiHS STU8 WITH 


Active 

DUE DATE 

02 / 28/2012 


TREASURER 
CnYOFfUk! 
P.O.BOX 1150 
PUNT, Ml 48501 


Saq-3133 


PRESORTED 
FIRST CLASS MAIL 
OS POSTAGE PAID 
CITY OF FLINT 





OD0003?bfiaOOaoai4?fl50aBfl201200Qaom c 113777Db 


keep THIS portion for your records 


fVifV, Salanc* 


W3 Payments 

AtyustrnentS 

13.36 - 

: JsNsw 

















CITY OF FLINT 

DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 

Customer Service Center 


Douglas Bmgaman 
Treasurer 


CITY OF FLINT 

WATER NON-PAYMENT TURN-OFF POLICY 

1 , Water services to any customer may be shut off if the account is not paid until after 30 days after 
the due date. (City ordinance 46-52 (h)) 

* 

2, Non-payment turn-offs are done only Monday through Thursday. The Customer Service Center 
does not schedule non-payment turn-offs on Fridays. Saturdays. Sundays, or most recognized 
holidays, 

3, Illegal usage, broken payment arrangements and NSF (non-sufficient funds) turn-offs are done at 

any time without additional notice, 

■w 


Dayne Walling 
Mayor 


4. Turn-off* notices are mailed to delinquent customers fifteen ( 15) days before actual turn-off 


5, The water customer is responsible for maintenance of all plumbing in the premises includim 
connection to City water mains or sewer lines. 


6 If a customer disputes a water bill and is unable to resolve the issue with Customer Service 

personnel, the customer may request an administrative review. Further information on any water 
account may be obtained by calling (SI 0) 766-7015 or visiting the Customer Ser\ ice Center at 1 ' 
Floor, City Hall. 1 101 S. Saginaw St, 


Preliminary Options for Future City of Flint Water Sources 


Consider a New Negotiated Contract with Detroit Water and Sewer Department 


PRO'S 

CON'S 

No upfront capital costs 

Possibility to negotiate a lower rate 

Ability to "Blend" water sources to further control costs 

Lack of control over new / fixed changes 
Past practices 


Consider a Contract with the Karegnondi Water Authority 


PRO'S 

CON'S 

Voting member of KWA board 

Ability to "Blend" water sources to further control costs 
Raw water is an asset for attracting new buisnesses 

Capital cost (debt service) 
Uncertainty of final costs 


Blended Use of the Flint River 



PRO'S 

CON'S 

Helps control cost of water 



*** CURRENTLY NO DECISIONS HAVE BEEN MADE REGARDING THE FUTURE WATER SOURCE 







Improvements for City of Flint Water System 


Reduce Leakage 


■Finalize a Preventative Maintenance Plan 

> (Planning started in January 2012, requires funding, ... part of Operational Costs) 

> Will help identify repair area’s 


■Reduce water theft 


■Replace water meters 

>We currently have an eighteen month plan to replace all meters with more efficient “Smart Meters” 

■Encourage routine household checks 

>“Faulty” toilets are a significant reason for household water loss, and unexpected larger bills. 


Other Leakage concerns 

'/Transmission Loss 
'/Fire Hydrants 
'/Incorrect water bills 


'/Non-Payment 



City of Flint Water Fund 

Proprietary Funds Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Net As sets 
Fiscal Year Ended June 30 



2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 2012 Projected 

2013 Budget 

Current Assets 
Current Liabilities 

17,248,277 

7,053,131 

16,155,282 

7,039,015 

13,213,411 

6,796,178 

9,092,746 

8,287,409 

9,295,966 

11,736,286 



Capital Assets, net of accumulated depreciation 
Revenue Bonds, long-term portion 
Unrestricted Net Assets/(Deficit) 

34,453,626 

33,759,432 

12,183,661 

57,264,585 

31,804,432 

8,396,496 

55,977,802 

30,156,259 

2,694,056 

54,419,070 

28,116,259 

(5,795,973) 

52,253,233 

25,925,336 

(12,443,265) 

(13,237,665) 

(12,733,233) 

City of Flint Sewer Fund 








Proprietary Funds Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Net Assets 
Fiscal Year Ended June 30 








2007 

2008 

2009 

2010 

2011 

2012 Projected 

2013 Budget 

Current Assets 
Current Liabilities 

45,805,754 

17,117,109 

45,515,711 

18,000,968 

39,299,954 

12,928,688 

22,199,959 

2,570,710 

16,496,427 

1,894,249 



Capital Assets, net of accumulated depreciation 
Revenue Bonds, long-term portion 
Unrestricted Net Assets/(Deficit) 

76,913,051 

34,215,792 

73,794,673 

28,085,991 

74,719,675 

21,329,011 

70,200,627 

9,327,738 

65,736,675 

(423,349) 

(7,646,457) 

(10,646,457) 

Water and Sewer Combined 








Current Assets 
Current Liabilities 

2007 

63,054,031 

24,170,240 

2008 

61,670,993 

25,039,983 

2009 

52,513,365 

19,724,866 

2010 

31,292,705 

10,858,119 

2011 

25,792,393 

13,630,535 

2012 Projected 

2013 Budgeted 


14 




Response to Treasury regarding water rates, etc. 


The cost of water and sewer in the City of Flint has become one of the most vexing issues 
facing the Emergency Financial Manager. When the Emergency Manager was appointed 
in December 2011 the water system had a $20 million deficit. In order to address this 
deficit the EM was forced to increase water and sewer rates by over a combined 120% in 
the past 18 months. 

When the previous EFM left the City in 2004, the water system has a reserve of 
approximately $60 million. In the intervening years several things occurred: for three of 
five years (2007-2011) no rate increases were passed along to customers even though 
Detroit charged increases of over 10% per year; in the years when increases were passed 
along those amounts did not equal the actual cost of the system; the City chose to use the 
equity built up in the Water and Sewer funds until that was no longer available; a large 
lawsuit was settled; the City must pay for the $48 million MDEQ upgrades required at 
the Water Treatment Plant; and unbilled or unpaid water and sewer charges increased 
significantly. 

In the past 18 months water and sewer rates have been increased to reflect the actual costs 
to operate the water and sewer system. Major leaks in the distribution system have been 
repaired. Unpaid water and sewer usage is now being addressed and the water affidavit 
process is part of this problem. 

The City of Flint currently allows landlords to put the water and sewer billing in the name 
of the renter. This affidavit process holds the landlord harmless for any water costs. The 
deposit for the affidavit has been set at $100, which is the lowest in the County. The 
deposit fees in the County range from a low of $100 to a high of $500. The City is 
raising its rate to $350, which puts us about in the middle of the range. Depending on 
usage, this will cover 60 to 90 days’ water charges and reduce the amount of uncollected 
billing. Keep in mind, any water not paid for is eventually charged to those who do pay 
through increased rates. 

Because the deposit is so low in relation to the current charges, renters quickly owe more 
than the deposit, and find it easier to simply walk away from the rental and forfeit the 
deposit. This results in the City being on the hook for the unpaid bills. Currently there 
are 4,893 affidavits, and 4029 of them (82%) past due. This facctor alone totals to just 
under $3 million. In addition, when the renter walks away, the City has no way of 
knowing that the property is vacant. Many times the landlord rents the property again, 
without filing an affidavit, and the water continues to be charged to the former renter, 
again adding uncollected bills to the City. In the past the collection rate for past due 
accounts, when turned over to a collection agency, has been about 3% on average. Keep 
in mind that this is a deposit, not a fee, and can be refunded when the renter leaves the 
property. Also, the landlord can avoid the renter’s deposit requirement by keeping the 
water and sewer billing in his name. 

The City is also studying the potential to hold the landlord accountable for the water 
charges under certain conditions, such as failure to notify the City when a renter leaves 
and then renting the property again without filiing a new affidavit. 



The City recognizes that the high cost of water is a factor which is causing low income 
residents to choose to leave the City and the increase in the deposit fee might accelerate 
that choice. However, many of the surrounding communities charge a higher deposit than 
does the City o Flint. Renters are leaving the City because they can get better housing for 
less money, live in safer neighborhoods with better schools, have their water charges 
decrease by about half, and have their insurance rates reduced by approximately 50%. 

Water and sewer costs have resulted in about 8,000 current customers to be more than 60 
days past due. Many are senior citizens who have lived in Flint their entire life, paid their 
taxes, etc. and now find themselves unable to pay their water bill. This concerns the City 
more than the issue of deposits. We have put in place for this year the ability for citizens 
to direct a part of their city tax refund to help people with their water bills, and we are 
reviewing other options as well as scheduled meetings with agencies involved in helping 
low income people with their bills. 

We further recognize that we have staffing issues and water theft to address. The City is 
able to complete about 120 water shut-offs per week. At that rate we can not keep up 
with delinquent account shut-offs. The city also reconginzes that water theft through 
meter by-pass or unauthorized turn-on must be resolved. 

Ultimately, the City must find a way to hold down future increases in the cost of water, to 
bring them more in line with the Genesee County water customers. To this end the City 
has recommended to Treasury, that the City leave the Detroit Water System and join 
KWA with Genesee County, Lapeer and Sanilac Counties and the City of Lapeer. We 
believe this is the most significant long term factor in stabilizing costs to the water 
customers in the City of Flint. 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Wednesday, March 04, 2015 4:55 PM 
Elizabeth Murphy 

FW: Water Advisory Committee Prep Materials 
Water Advisory Cmte 030515.zip 


Liz, 

Please be sure to use my email (or at least copy me) on all matters regarding the Water Advisory 
Committee to ensure Harvey reviews the material. 

Thank you, 

Stacie 

Stacie Clayton, Assistant Director 
Harvey Hollins III, Director 

Governor’s Office of Urban and Metropolitan Initiatives 
3044 West Grand Boulevard, Ste. 14-650 
Detroit, Ml 48202 
313.456.4994 (office) 

. 5 !.^y.t.Q.nsl@michjgan.goy 

From: Elizabeth Murphy [mailto:emurphv@dtyoffHnt.com1 

Sent: Wednesday, March 04, 2015 3:02 PM 
Subject: Water Advisory Committee Prep Materials 

I am sending you a zip folder containing the handout materials which you will receive at the Water Advisory 
Committee meeting tomorrow. Mayor Walling suggested that you may want to have time to look over these 
documents in preparation for the meeting. 

Please stop at the check in table tomorrow to receive your folder and name tag. 


Liz Murphy 

Assistant to the Emergency Manager 
City of Flint 
810 237 2025 


l 



Document Cannot Be Imaged 



Flint Water Advisory Committee First Meeting 
March 5,2015 2-4pm MTA Auditorium 


Committee Members will receive a packet at the entry with their name tag, question sticky notes, pencil and 
other sources of information. 

I. Welcome and Introduction of Facilitators 

El, Facilitator Ground Rules and Agenda Review 

Purpose of the Water Advisory Committee: Provide a 
respectful means of sharing factual information between the 
City of Flint and the Flint Water and Sewer Customers 

The meeting will follow the printed agenda. 

The meeting must conclude at 4pm today. The Facilitator will 
keep us on track. 

HI. Expected Outcomes: 

Today’s meeting: that all of the water questions have been 
identified - we may not be able to answer all today, but we 
would like to set up a means of communicating with this 
committee on a regular basis. 


Through 201 6 - That the transition to KWA water processing 
and distribution is a smooth, satisfactory process resulting a 
safe, consistent water supply. 

IV. Status of Water and Distribution System Today - H. Croft, Director 
Department of Public Works 

Evaluation of Flint Water Treatment Plantand Distribution System - 
Veolia, City of Flint Consultant 

V. Questions from Committee Members and Sort by Category: Safety, 
Quality, Affordability, Sustainability, History, and Miscellaneous 

Vi, Response to most frequently asked questions. 


Vli. Hex! Steps 

The next meeting has been scheduled for Thursday, March 19, 2015 here 
at the MTA Auditorium from 2~4pm. 

How often would the committee like to meet? How did this format work? 


VIII. 







City Of Flint Water Forum 


CONTENTS 

Water History Facts .. . 3 

Frequently Asked Questions 4 

Budget Allocation and Fund Expenses 5 

Asset / Revenue Charts 6 

Recent Timeline of Water and Sewer Funds 7 

City of Flint- Water and Sewer System Additional Asset / Revenue Data 8 

Calculation of Water and Sewer Rates for FY13 Budget 9 

Example Water Bill 10 

Turn-off Policy 11 

Preliminary Options for Future City of Flint Water Sources 12 

Improvements for City of Flint Water System 


13 



City Of Flint Water History Facts 


Current Treatment Plant was put into service in 1954. 

Current 72" main pipeline was completed in 1970. 

Flint signed a 30 year contract with Detroit water and Sewer Department in the mid 1960’s. . 

The contract with DWSD has expired and we are currently operating on a yearly extension, 

In 2006 Flint completed a $48,000,000 upgrade of the existing Water Plant. (Required by the MDEQ & for backup only). 
Flint’s Water & Sewer System is approximately a 300,000,000 Enterprise. 

Flint’s Water & Sewer System is designed to deliver water to over 200,000 people with over 1,500 miles of infrastructure. 
Flint's most recent census count shows a population of approximately 102,000 in 2010. 

Flint’s census population in 2000 was approximately 124,000. 

The water system had over 45,000 customers in June of 1999. 

The water system had just over 36,000 customers by June 201 1 . 

The “Fixed Costs” that must be covered to maintain the system and deliver quality water have increased over 
time. 


3 



City Of Flint 

Most Frequently Asked Questions about Water 


□Why are the water rates so high ? 

□How does my water bill work (Explanation of charges) ? 

□Why do others in the area pay less for the same amount of water ? 
□Where has all of the water and sewer fund money gone ? 

□What do I do if I think my bill is incorrect ? 

□What effect does leakage or theft have on my bill ? 

□How can i report water theft ? 

□Why don’t we go back to using the Flint River like we once did ? 



Audited 



200? Afetmii 2008 Acinus 2009 Actual 20! 

;0 6,cr«ut 2i 

>i i Actmxi 2,012 Fr<(j 

® etfe.it 20 i 3 

Biidget 

Operating Rave n«8 s 

5X090.679 5X100,332 C 

7,328,589 

54,385,644 67,9f 

58,044 81, 

.734,562. 

Other Revenues 

2,627,330 3,274,450 1,442,383 . 

. 764,886 

68,645; X 

IB, WQ: 

455,867 

Ansusa! Revenues 

. .53,718,51 8 53,348,336 4 ; 

3,691,475 . j 

94,454,283 , . ' 60, If 

>9,7:14 82, 

.190,419 


Water Purchased 

16,0S2,aats 

16,297,871 

26,302,390 

17,42:1,663 

17,103,762 

20,913,387 21, 756,787 

24:03:1,417 

Personnel Cost:; 

3.7,292.444 

27,902)206 

28,149*346 

28,618,817 29,640,499 

28,346,350 

doeratlos* Expenses. 

5, 355, 638 

6.145,139 


8,146,390 

6,917,964 6,420,260 

7,299,250 

Administrative Expenses 

2.1,30.0,900 

4,229,382 

3,463,231 

7i32?f;630 

6,221,62? 

14,140,04? 

0epMdah:Oh. 

7,217,142 

7,, 132,876 

8,364,022 

8,854,883 

8,689,809 8,615,000 

7, .300,000 

interest Exoe nse 

66.632 

485,499 


812,270 

2,990,000 

754,890 703,150 

=544,314 

Transfers: to Q;i%erfuads 



2,930,000 . 

2,990,000 ... 2,990,000 

2,990,000 

Annual Expenses 

67,304,762 

6p,593;381 . 

67,588,687 

73,384,677 

75,113,094 81,593,158 

83,111,418 






Gfy offlmt 

Unrestricted Net Assets/f Deficit) 
l : Y 200? through l¥ 2013 



2 s 0 f %£& SiM 2010 201I 2mi xm | 

Prejferied Budgeted | 


Revenues 1 

Expenses 


200? Actual 

67,304,762 


2008 Aetna! 
54,374,782 
60,593,331 


2009 Aetna! 
53,346,936 

sijsmmi 


20i0Ae$??»l: 

48,691,475 

?3,384,8?7 


201 1 Aetna! 2012 Prelected 
. 54,454,289 68,10)9, 734 

75,113,094 81,593,2.58 


2013 Budget 
82,190,419: 
miiW® 


70,0rK)/>30 

S0 ; O«10OO 

■js; 

f ; 50,090,000 


Current Assets smd I JefstiU'es; 
F¥ 290? through r¥ 2tm 


^ #,000,000 ,,,, .,,... 

«» 39,000,000 

§ 20,OfMid)0 






• 

... .. 


■2m loot. Mm- m®- mt 


a 

•1 w 

5 ffi 


Cdrrsuf ,&ssefe 4 
'»«'«•« cun: erd OldlHSes | 


iG),srrt0v'!3 


*§ S?0,£8SS,Q9S 

« 

|: : $m«s%oee 
^ I r^eas,#?; 
$4Acx«,<xie 


€sty of fere; 

37 20O7 thnnfgh 7013 

Water «s?0 Sdw«r fend 


%v 


•Ns v . 


.......... .... ..,,., 

';4^ v ' : ' ” ' : ’ * ’ x : : : ' 




# 4 


■?' . </ .# .*# „ 

Vr s?? sis 

■• ^ ,Sp 7v v 


*■, 




■*F 


J&' 


jr 

■i& 

•r 









The average; annual resirSeritiaHvster sewer biii in FY200S was SesstOsm S?£KJ armusUy 
The Avatfage armnaS rcsidontia! water* sswsr fei!S i« FY13 vviU its? nearly $1,700 


Sxnsnse s h ave estce adeg revemtes eyetv yea r since 2006: 


RSSOAL 

year 

Rate 

Base 

2006 

: 20O5~; 

2007 

: 2005 | 

2008 

. . 2£3Q£5 . i 

2000 

2000 1 

2010 

2011 

zm$> 1 

2Q41 j 
2011 1 

2012 


2013 

2013 


Revenues 

fytintie 

gx;o>arme» 


Unreserved 

Sys-tnm 


: SODS ; $55,204,242 $Sa.933;7S2 §4,270.450 $80,340,01 3 

2005 |:S5a,SSS,S57 W,44a,893 S4S,390.4$2 

. 2Q0S I §04,274.78':: $60,593.33'; 40 %$%:$$® . 833.402,488 


I 2009 ;: :$§.$, 488JSS $87 ,728,21$ $24,023,085 


LJSMj $3#34. :< >'S8 

2QD:1 | $m<8Z7®m $7&ji88&m: 

| • ....... 

: 3*38,379,187 #3,382,84© #US4P,:pt$;j ClSOAMAS# 




FAC TORS 

MPACTSfG COST 

souveNcr sbspact 


No rate adjosiniieot 
3 5 5 .? sniiiios! I&wsiiit seiTiertianr 

:No rateadjtsttrieni 
ORES: liabilities added 

Mo rate adjustment 

Use or retained eamirsjs & ixSg&ieS 

Revenue lost duels recession 

tieeaf.retatose earnings fcudgsi&ci 

Use of retai ned rsaftwgs hudgetecf 

i*Shl?8A$& 

Water gorcfissg eostinctease 
RMG^LegatYVdminCesfAjieeetioO 


■i tmfifibff Sf 

y? 


15 ? 

0 

mi 

3<© : 

2.7 

$C^ 

1.9 

l.i 

$3.0 



?'?•' 


0.8 

3 : 13;0 


2 

$4.0 

f- 2;: 

3.0 

$10.3 

0 

3,8 . 

$&«•: 

s:i 

PI 

G. 

0.8 

SS.'i 
SO. 8 

0. 

2,3. 

$2.3 

: 2,i 

1,5 

Mil 



S68.2 





Calculation of Water and Sewer Rates for FY13 Budget 


March. 2012: 


Water 

Sewer 

TOTAL 


Expense 
Projection 
Based on 
FY12 
Costs 

Revenue 
Projection 
Based on 
FY12 
Receipts 

Difference 
Between 
Projected 
Revenues and 
Expenses 

Rate 
Increase 
Necessary 
To Ciose 
Qap- 

$49.9 

$44.4 

-$5.5 

12.4% 

$31.0 

$21.4 

-$9.6 

44.9% 

$80.9 

$65.8 

-$15.1 

22.9% 










CITY of FLINT, MICHIGAN 
WATER &/OR SEWER BILL 

Sanfco at 5810 BALDWIN 9LVD 


ACCOU 


mmmm\ 


Active 


DUE DATE 


02/28/2012 


roinn i n " 1 n urn 




RETURN TH» STUB WITH 
YOUR PAYMENT 


TREASURER 
CITY OF FUNT 
P.O. SOX 1950 
FUNT, Ml 48501 


S#q»3138 


**AUT0 


PRESORTED 
FIRST CLASS MAIL 
US POSTAGE PAID 
CITY OF FUNT 




0000037t.S10000Pm?fiS02ea20120DD001 i m37770b 


KEEP THIS PORTION FOR YOUR RECORDS 


TREAD/DATH/TYPEl NEW READ/D ATE/TYP E CONS SERVICE 


12 A 363 02/03/2012 A 2 Sawar Norwitetered 

Sewa/SveChrs 

Water 

Water Svc Ct*p 


ACCOUNT: BALO-00581O-00C0-01 (SERVICE AT 


PENALTY ASSESSED 30 DAYS AFTER DUE DATE 



CHARGE I Prav. Satenc* 


Paymant* 


Adjoattnanta 


Currant Pa naKy 


NawChargta 


161.08 


-75-00 


0.00 




10 




























CITY OF FONT 

DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 

Customer Service Center 


Douglas Singaman 
Treasurer 


CITY OF FLINT 
WATER NON-PAYMENT TURN-OFF POLICY 

L Water services to any customer may be shut off if the account is not paid until after 30 days after 
the due date. (City ordinance 46-52 (h)) 

2. Non-payment tum-offs are done only Monday through Thursday. The Customer Service Center 
docs not schedule non-payment turn-offs on Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays, or most recognized 
holidays. 

3. Illegal usage, broken payment arrangements and NSF (non-sufficient funds) tum-offs are done at 
any time without additional notice. 

4. Tum-off notices are mailed to delinquent customers fifteen ( 1 5) days before actual turn-off. 

5. The water customer is responsible for maintenance of all plumbing in the premises including 
connection to Citv water mains or sewer lines*., 

6. If a customer disputes a water bill and is unable to resolve the issue with Customer Service 
personnel, the customer may request an administrative review. Further information on any water 
account may be obtained by calling (810) 766-7015 or visiting the Customer Sendee Center at 1 K 
Floor, City Hall, 1 1 01 S. Saginaw St. 




Preliminary Options for Future City of Flint Water Sources 


Consider a New Negotiated Contract with Detroit Water and Sewer Department 



No upfront capital costs Lack of control over new /fixed changes 

Possibility to negotiate a lower rate Past practices 

Ability to "Blend" watersources to further control costs 


Consider a Contract with the Karegnondi Water Authority 



Voting memoerof KWA board 

Ability to "Blend" water sources to further control costs 

Raw water is an asset for attracting new buisnesses 


Capital cost (debt service) 
Uncertainty of final costs 


Blended Use of the Flint River 



Helps contra cost of water 


*** CURRENTLY NO DECISIONS HAVE BEEN MADE REGARDING THE FUTURE WATER SOURCE 


12 





Improvements for City of Flint Water System 


Reduce Leakage 


■Finalize a Preventative Maintenance Plan 

> (Planning started in January 2012, requires funding, . . . part of Operational Costs) 

> Will help identify repair area’s 


■Reduce water theft 


■Replace water meters 

>We currently have an eighteen month plan to replace all meters with more efficient “ Smart Meters' ' 

"Encourage routine household checks 

> “Faulty” toilets are a significant reason for household water loss, and unexpected larger bills. 


Other Leakage concerns 

'■'Transmission Loss 
'''Fire Hydrants 
'■''Incorrect water bills 


'''Non-Payment 



Water Main Breaks 2014 


.'d Main Breaks- from Leak Report 






W SpM p ; ipfg bglt 

|l T d?a hete 

^ervtae Isis 




if €orp bre-stc 

'5|? Hps&ssresssa &es3 

W hoi-s fe» sTsecbsnfcsi ; 

%■■:■$ h S:ftf OS- 1 

^ 3” dis h®te 

,fl«S , 

ft 4' no--? 

jgfe .- ... . 

'f »P*3 pipe 

Vsjiv© I'SfiiS? 

^ ' 1 rfss Note 

# 3* split 

W 3/4" iemi asm 

* 

•f 4' 1 split 
^ Tapping ssdidi© 

0 Other f hlr> data 





s-jis-v ^ 

ks if jgSSsdg/isiifiis® 



City of Flint 
Water System Facts 





What Can Impact Water Quality ? 



Quality Indicators 


w v a hu! n to & bbtuUai 


: nt^ ^ pnhtni 

W tU:i W W s s i W & 


b 








CITY TESTING 





Michigan DEQ 
State License Types 




Recent Boil Water Advisories in MICHIGAN 



Edwardsburg/ Lunker 

Nov 12, 2014 

Fire 

Superior Township 

May 03, 2014 

Main Break 

Benton Harbor 

Jan 9, 2014 

Water Pressure 

Union Township 

Nov 6, 2013 

Main Break 

Charlevoix 

August 7, 2013 

Pressure Loss 

Novi 

Feb 13, 2013 

Pressure Loss 

Muskegon Heights 

Nov 17, 2012 

Main Break 


Commerce Township 


Dec 6, 2010 


Depressurization 



City of Flint Contacts 



Howard Croft - 



Daugherty Johnson- 



Brent Wright - 



Mike Glasgow - 



Robert Bincsik - 




City of Flint Treatment Plant 
Public Works Director 
Utilities Administrator 
EPA Safe Drinking Water Hotline 


810-787-6537 
810-766-7346 x 2403 
810-766-7135 x 2602 
1-800-426-4791 




DATE 


IMPROVEMENT 


improvement ot internal software controls 


inereased flushing efforts (as weather permits;} 
Adjusted operational softening to no less than 80% 


Reduced time of water in the system 
Reduce chlorine demand 


Started evaluation of different polymers 


Removal of organic carbon 


Hired vendor to fee ozone eystem 


Better oxidation and disinfecting 


Started 3 a r testing.;; ; ■ 

Hired consultant Veoiia for process review 
Leased and installed TTHfvl analyzer 


Assists in dosage amounts and polymer aids 
Professional recommendations 


Feh. Adjustments to reservoir level to match demand 


Reduce time of wafer in system 


Oilv of fin! 






TO; 

Flint City Residents 

FROM: 

Howard Croft,. DPW Director 

RE: 

Water Questions 

DATE: 

February 16, 2015 


Over recent weeks the City of Flint has taken a number of measures to increase: both 
the qualify of water and the availability of information. MonthlyOperating Reports are 
posted online approximately 15 days following the end of each month,, a summary 
report is also posted with additional information of utility functions, and the City lias 
increased the. level of testing being performed on the water, 

A. nationally recognized vendor (Veoiia North America) has been contracted to provide 
a detailed overview of City procedures and to make recommendations where they see 
areas of improvements. 

The following questions and answers are. provided for ail interested parties, and -are: 
intended to provide transparent, detailed, and updated Information that is pertinent to 
the City of Flint’s water system. 


City of Flint - Questions and Answers 
is it currently safe to drink City of Flint water? 

Yes. Water from the City of Flint meets si! of the EPA regulatory standards of the Safe Drinking 
water, Act. 

SilY .HA IL. OBI s.. SA eiNAW-StSKST , RSfi S18S. RJNT.' MiSftfeAKt 48S82- OlOi 7$K-?13S rax ) ; g-j 6i 7SS-7W3 » 


What can you say about the quality? 

The: City sf .Flint is committed to proyidihg. High quality drinking water to residents, and 
businesses, in the community, and has taken every precaution tq ensure, the waiter quality meets 
guidelines for safe dunking: water. To ensure that tap water is safe to drink, the Environmental 
Protection Agency (ERA) prescribes regulations., which limit, the amount of certain contaminants 
Tn water provided by public water systems.. In addition the Food and Drug Administration 
regulations establish limits tbr eontamirtants in bottled water, which most provide the same 
protection for public health. The City of Flint tap water meets the guidelines set by both entities. 


What is considered to be a contaminant? 

Contaminants that may be present in water include microbial contaminants such as . vi ruses and 
bacteria,, and inorganic contaminants such as salts: and metals:, which can occur naturally; 
Pesticides,, herbicides,, organic . chemical contaminants and radioactive eontamlnants could also 
be present. 

Its important to note that drinking water, including bottled water may reasonably be expected 
to. contain at least small amounts of some contaminants. But. the. presence of contaminants does 
not necessarily indicate that the water poses a health risk. 

Will these contaminants make people sick? 

The. ERA requires, that every water report; must contain language addressing the fact that, some 
people have corn prised immune-systems or conditions: that make them more , vu lnerable to 
contaminants in drinking water than ths.geheral population, 

A few examples are, an individual with a corriarprnissd immune, system such as someone 
undergoing chemothera py or an organ transplant, t person with HIV/AIDs or other immune 
system disorders. Some elderly people and infants can be particularly at risk from infections. 
These individuals and parents of infants should seek advice from their health providers. It's 
important to. understand: that this, is the. case: With all public drinking water, it'smot unique to 
water from the Flint River, 

How often does the City monitor water quality? 

The City monitors. its water on a daily basis to assure that water quality remains within 
established guideli nes: With the variances in water temperature, and. the leakage: and infiltration 
problems srisingmue to failure of: parts af:t.he:d'istrihufipn :sy.stem^ water quality did exceed, for a 
time, some of the established guidelines. This resulted in the issuance of the recent, notices to 
the public. Once it was learned that sorne guidelines were, not being met, the City% immediate 
focus was to bring water quality, back within guidelines. The efforts taken to address. non- 
compliance included increasing: water flow through valve replacements and hydrant flushing and 
optimizing treatment processes. 

What were the causes of increased levels of bacteria (including fecal) levels that I read about? 
Have the causes been sufficiently addressed? If not what needs to be done to prevent this from 

As is the case with most systems which treat surface water- many factors contributed, to: the 

* CiTY HALL. US -; S. 3Agft>AWWTRSST , KM.St&S. ralOi ?SS, m;S F ay?8ieV7 66 ^ a4». * 


environment which allowed bacteria to proliferate, One of the main f actors in pur ease is that 
when water travels through the 600 miles of the City’s distribution mains, it will,, at times, in 
certain areas of the city, reside in; the, system for different 1 periods of time, Water purchased 
from the Detroit Water QSew.age Department is drawn, front Lake Huron, chlorinated, and then, 
it, travels over 60 miles to reach the City, By the time the water reaches f-iint it is stable and 
capable of Withstanding this type of residency time with the system. Water drawn from the Flint 
River, specifically in summer months. when the temperature Is fluctuating, is more susceptible to 
being impacted, by variables such as high residency tiroes. and increased chemical reaction, Over 
the recent three months, the residency time of water In the system; has been reduced to 
spproxi rn ately one week. 

The Depart me.nt of Environmental Qualify (DEQ) requires that a minimum of 100 tests be 
performed monthly for chlorine residuals at various locations throughput the system , When 
residual levels are top low, it creates an environment if* which, bacteria such as .fetal eoiiforrn can 
grow. After, switching sources:, w-e encountered testing: sites in June 2014 that were, consistently 
returning low residua! levels. Severa l of these sites became areas that total eoiiforrn was. 
eventually detected and ultimately "boil water" notices were issued- A significant cause of this is 
attributed to aged infrastructure which includes broken valves. 

The necessary repairs and adjustments have beers made to bring bacteria to acceptable levels 
with the exception of one. test site - the 230,0 block of Flushing Road, where low residual levels: 
continue,' The City expects and is actively searching for valve, issues. The.: engineering firm LAN & 
Potter Consulting is working to develop a hydraulic model of the. distribution system and. have 
theabiiity to use unidirectional flushing thaiwiif assist in addressing areas where residual levels 
are law. 

The City has. done internal testing: recently that shows all sight sites currently well underneath 
the Maximum Contaminant Level and the next official testing date is due to the DEQ by March 
I s5 , 2015, 

It was recently announced, in the news that Governor Snyder gave Flint $2 mil! ton to fix the 
water problems? Is this true? 

Yes, Under the state's Financially. Distressed Cities, Villages and: Townships Grant Program, flint 
was awarded $2 million to help address some of the. problems associated with an aglng : water 
distribution system. While the Ci ty of Flint, is very appreciative of the grant, it's going to take. a. 
substantially greater amount to fully address the improvements needed. 

The grant will cover two si g n if i cant projects, one, to decommission' the incinerator that will 
resu it in ~$400.,000 in savings annually to. the sewer fund and two, a complete teak detection 
performed on all of the large: transmission mains in the City that wi ll reduce water loss, thereby 
creating :a savings in the. water lu rid . 

This issue did. not happen before the; switch from Detroit water to flint water,. Why now? 
Switching; to the. Flint: River has highlighted underground Inconsistencies in the distribution 
system that have, existed, for decades, Over the last few 'years, the City has engaged in the 
development of a more . effective and. consistent preventative maintenance program and a 
Capital Improvement Plan that will result In a mors. reliable water disfri.buti.on center oyer time. 



Was st known prior to the switch from Detroit water to Flint water that there would be 
problems managing certain bacteria levels? 

It was understood that the Flint River would be. subject to variations due to temperature 
Changes; rain, events, and would: have higher organic carbon, levels than Lake Huron water and 
would be more -difficulty to treat. These facts were presented' to arid weighed by licensed staff, 
LAN- engineering consultants and the D£Q. it. was determined, that Flint has. the equipment and 
the capacity to meet the demands of treating river water. 

So in the majority of cases, it'ssafa to drink Flint tap water? 

Ves> : as safe it possibly can be,. However if a person has a. compromised immune. system then 
he/she should consult with her/his physician first, . it is also safe tp ; bath and brush your teeth 
using, the water. 

What about the ’’hardness" of the wafer? 

The Flint River is a. harder water source than water drawn from Lake Huron:. Hardness is classified 
as having a. higher mineral content than, "soft wafer", with the: main concentration being calcium 
and .magnesium. Water hardness is not considered by the E-PA to be a health hazard. 

Water hardness has been known, to i mpact things such as cleaning tasks such as laundry, 
dishwashing, bathing personal grooming, arid has also been associated with somerforms of skin 
Irritation such aseczerna. 

What are the public reporting requirements for these sorts of problems, and has the City met 
those requirements? What can be done to commuhieate useful information about a public 
health threat in timelier manner? 


The ERA 2010 "Revised Public 1 Notification Handbook" h.a.s e specific breakdown of the elements 
required, in: public notifications and- includes usable templates. The EFA has three different tiers 
associated with community water systems (CWSi,,ea.ch with specific. timeframesa.nd 
requirements. that trigger upon issuance of the: violation; 

Tier 1, CWS. must provide public notification within 24 hours: of a violation and continue this as 
directed by the primary agency. 

4 Tier 2. CWS must provide public notification within 30 days of a violation and. continue this 
every'’ three months until the violation is resolved 

« Tier 3, CWS must provide public notification within one year and the ERA. recommends. repeat 
occurrences be provided in an .annual notice 

The current violation is classified as a tier. 2 violation and was issued December 16, 2014. 

Besides the home notificatlbris, where can 1 find official com municati ons and any update s cm 
the Flint water Issue? 

The. Q'ty posts information on the City of Flint website at ww w.c ityoffiint.c o m/Thefe is a special 
section dedicated to addressing Flint water concerns and. providing up-to-the-triimrte updates, in 

tCi TV BALL, 1i81 .S. SAG;^VV STKEgT,.Rfe SIPS. FU8T. MiCtHOAM 48S82’ «M0me.-?18S f : a.x fS10) 78S.TZ43 ' 



addition, updates can be found on Flint's Faeebook page and citizens may also call the Flint 
Water Plant & Facilities at 810- 7S7 -6537 with questions', 


If the water is ok to drink, why did 


General Motors has been A great partner to the city for many years, and when they recognised 
that an elevated level of chloride in the water was having an impact on a specific machining: 
process they requested permission to transfer wafer delivery for that specific process to flint 
Township. This represents only 10% of the water purchased and used by GM at the entire site. 
The remaining 90% of their Water usage Including ail of the drinking water for GM employees Is 
still, purchased from; the. City of Flint, 


Res peeffo iiy Sub m Itted , 


Howard O. Croft 
Public Works Director 



TO; 

FROM;; 



Wayne Workman. Deputy Treasurer 
Treasury Department 
State of Michigan 


Jefty Enft^g <Sey Manager 

City s / 

/"/ 

March 3.4015 


Es^§^^.MscK^sj;€or#e.C%-,dfFlfia^ City goyernpicfit 

to felajioiai solvency,, and working to ;$mvm that the City move s: forward: on a financially 
sustainabie basis. The steps taken over the past fhteeyeaM have beers difficult. Taxes and fees have 
been raised, servicesand workforce redrseed, avid; ongoing costs, including legacy costs, have been 
constrained. 

Hie emtent controversy surrounding the provision of water, and the path for resolution, has a 
potentially significant impact: on the: progress that is being made. I am satisfied that the water 
provided So Flint users today is within all MDEQ and EPA guidelines, as evidenced by the most 
reeentWater quality results conducted for MDEQ. We have a continuing cpnimilment to maintain 
water safety and to improve water ;^svuce this eormtufment 

will he made, 

City should return to DWSD, even for a short period of time, 
Would,, in mv judgment, have extremely negative dmucial conseguenees to the water system, and 
consequently to the rate payers. By the most conservative estimates, such a move would increase 
costs by at least $12 millioxr annually, with that amount achieved only by eliminating virtually all 
budgeted imptpyemcm the system. For a system with Unrestricted Assets ofonly $740,745, 
according to the June 30, 2014 audited financial statements, the only recourse within ihevCity'S 
control would be to increase revenues significantly. And in my judgment, dial would come from 
raising i^ps.fof Water by:30$i or more , Further, clianging the source of the eity % water would 
not necessarily change any of the aesthetky vf the water, including odor add discoloration, since 
those appear to be directly related to the aging pipes and otiicr isiiTastructiue that camywater fi'om 
the treatment: facility to o ur customers. 


Clftl oI.MM; * llii.S, Sa|l:unW Btreet « 




.cent * 


7bM7b4b s Faxt 





Wayne Workman 
March 3, 2015 
Page 2 


This direction of discussion also deviates from what, in my judgment, should be the focus: How 
can we not only operate and maintain a system to assure the delivery of safe and quality water 
dependably, but significantly reduce the cost of water and sewer to the users? At an average of 
$149 per month for water and sewer service for a residential user, the cost is extremely high in 
comparison to surrounding areas, as well as most areas across the state, and creates a significant 
financial burden for many users. In my judgment, we should all be concentrating on how to reduce 
rates by 50% or more. Unfortunately, there are no easy or evident answers, and continuation of 
the status will be an impediment to the sustainable recovery of the City of Flint. It is a conversation 
that I expect we will have with the recently created Water Quality Advisory Committee. 

My reasoning for this conclusion is as follows: 

One of the decisions made in the context of beginning to eliminate deficits and to restore financial 
stability to the City of Flint was to increase water and sewer rates significantly - the only choice 
available to financially stabilize a system that as of June 30, 2012, had a deficit of $8,758,091. 
Another was to leave DWDS for the KWA because it offered the opportunity to lower future rate 
increases. A third decision was to utilize the Flint River on an interim basis when DWSD 
unilaterally terminated the City’s contract for water purchase. That decision was made because it 
also offered an immediate cost savings opportunity which translated into the ability to upgrade the 
Water Treatment Plant without having to seek financing. It was a reasonable decision because of 
our experience in using the river in a back-up capacity, including test runs on a quarterly basis for 
several decades. 

Unfortunately, the switch to the river as a primary source was more challenging than anticipated, 
and the harsh winter of 20 1 3-20 1 4 resulted in much more damage to the aging water infrastructure 
than in previous years. The result was the issuance of required notices that water exceeded 
established guidelines for safety as it could affect certain vulnerable populations, and some users 
of the system experienced unpleasant odors and discoloration. Some users also appeared to have 
had some negative reactions to the new source of water. However, as soon as the test results were 
known. City staff took immediate actions to address the concerns. These actions are evidenced 
today by the fact that MDEQ has certified that our most recent testing shows water from all testing 
sites to be well within acceptable guidelines. Additionally, the City is continuing to taking the 
necessary actions to assure that the water supply remains safe and that water quality continues to 
improve. 

As the City has moved to address the situation, the suggestion continues to be made that the City 
should re-engage with DWSD and purchase water at least until the KWA pipeline is supplying 
water. As evidenced by the most recent letter from DWSD, such a decision would immediately 
increase the City’s cost by $846,700 per month, or $10,160,400 per year, just for the fixed cost 
portion of the price. The actual purchase of water would be an additional fee, and dependent upon 



Wayne Workman 
March 3, 2015 
Page 3 


the quantity purchased. We estimate the actual water purchase cost to average more than $ 1 million 
per month, for a grand total of approximately $22 million per year. Finally, the DWSD offer is 
conditioned upon the City (or presumably the KWA) agreeing to negotiate a long term contract 
(30 years) for back-up. 

The $22 million annual estimate of increased costs to purchase water from DWSD would be 
minimally offset by an approximate $3 million in reduced operating costs, and could be further 
offset by an additional $9 million, but only if all funding for capital improvements to the system 
are eliminated. To eliminate all funding dedicated to repairing, stabilizing, and improving the 
system would be totally irresponsible and would have long term negative consequences to the City 
and to future rate payers. 


As you are aware we have recently brought in outside expert assistance to evaluate the steps we 
have taken to assure that the water is safe and to continue to improve water quality. We are 
expecting specific recommendations within the next few weeks, and are committed to 
implementing those recommendations in a timely manner. Many steps have already been taken. I 
am confident that implementing their recommendations will assure a continuing supply of safe 
water as well as improved quality, and at far less cost than re-engaging DWSD. 

We have also created a 40-member Water Advisory Committee and a 13-member Technical 
Advisory Committee to assure two-way communication with the public and users of the system. 
Those committees will begin to meet this week, and we look forward to answering their questions 
and receiving their input. 

It is unfortunate that problems and concerns with quality have arisen, and we are working every 
day to address the issues that caused them. Maintaining safe water and improving quality is a top 
priority as we work to make the City of Flint an attractive place to live, work, study, and play. 




UmiTSTY WIDE WATER PS 


{?Sf?iOO£l 


2014-1S 

AMENPFD 

pgscRiPTiDN; mmm 

Dept SSS.IGQ-Utlktles - Water Adm.nssuaPon 
Fond l$i - Water Food 

801.000 Professional S ervice _ J2, 320,000.00^ 

ROWS City Engineering 
Dump Site Analysis 
LAN Water implementation 
JPA /U.S. Dept, interior 
Raftelis financial Update 
Bray Road 

TTHM Violation letters/fviaiiings 

MDEQ Permittees 

Energy Cests/Perforeisnce Contracts 

VeoLa Water Consultant 

Ciry Works/ Assesi Management 

Operational Contingent 

Tots! Dept 536.100-Utilities - Water Ad m in is i ratio n 

!>spt 540 1 00- Water 5e once Center Nianagen sen t 
Fund 591 • Water Fund 

801.000 Professional Service 374,400.00 

wrmWr.TC-oon n r r r .r. i - ii nn i- 1 1 nn - , r : - 1 1 . . . . . -w ... M*rt**i*V 

Sewerfines Cty engineering 
interna! investigations 
Landfill Services 
jarsitoriai Services 
After Honrs Water & Staking 
side stopping: 




548 202 Wsc Water Dtstrsburion Mains 
Fund S91 -• Water Fund 

801.000 Professional Service 

Fire Extinguisher Services 


Current gararge overruns Is $£8O.8O0«00 : 


60,000.00 


Balance is being used 


_o : oo o.oo soq- o o S9..soo.oo 

contract SOS. 00 

508.00 

ed f(>rj>odget adjustment to cover overrun.'; t'cr garage charges 


0.88 


Dept S4O30Q~Capitat improvement 
Fund 591 - Water Fond 

801.000 Professional Service 

Water Meters 

Water Main Replacement Iroquois 
Valve Exercising 


2,660,000.00 0.00 _ 0.00 

contract 


6O >: WD.0O 2,600,000.00 

60 ~obo'oo"' 

$ 2,500,000.00 

$ 100,000.00 



Total Dept S4G300-C3pitai improvement 



50,800.00; $ 2,600,000,00 


Dept 545.200- Water Riant - Operations 
Fund 591 - Water Fund 

801.000 Professional Service 80,000,0 0 _0.0G _S,866.9B 10,52 31)2 60,810.00 23,99 

Lab Testing " contract 10,323.02 


Dam inspections 

Coplprehepsive. fteulatory Cdrnplfe^ 
Lab Proficiency Testing 
Ail Max Data Support 

Iota! Dept 545.200-Water Plant - Operations 


$ 11,500.00 

$ 40,000.00 

$ 6 , . 000.00 

J 2,500.00 


Dept 545. 201-Water Riant Maintenance 
Fund 591 - Water Fund 

801.000 Profes sional Service ____ _ 26,000.00 

Vibration Analysis 
Itevatp.r ins^ectip ns & Services 
Diving for Dams inspection 
RP2 inpsection & Repair 
Generator Inspection & Sen/ices 


o.oq 


3,700.00 
contract $ 
contract $ 
contract $ 


12,9S5XK3___ _ 

"libo'oo ” 
2,455.00 
5,000.00 

$ 

$ 


9,345.00 64.06 


4.000. 00 

5.000. 00 


Total Dept 545.201 - Water Pis nt Mainte nance 


"26,000.00"' 6.00 3,200.00 $ ii’Sssio 5 


64,08 



Dept $4 5, iOO-Wa ter Pfe n 1 - Capita! i reprove roe ntr< 
fund 591 - Water fund 

801.000 Professional Service 2,900000.00 

Installation of Storage Tanks 
Motor Control Upgrade 
Easement- Electrical Grounding 
time Residual 

Cedar Street Pum pt Station 
Pimp Station Feeder 
TTMMOperatientat Evaluation 




927,098 . 07 
contract $ 
contract $ 
contract $ 
contract $ 


3,290,474.81 

" ns'm.oo' 

440,157,00 

4054,00 

135,991.81 


6 76,42 7 .12 . 


500,000.00 

.125,000.00 

50,000.00 


76.67 


Totai Dept 54S. 300-Water Plant - Capital improvements 2,900,000.00 


000 i 81 $ 


76.67 


Tots! 



18,420.460,01) 


YTD Balance Encumbered! Unencumbered 


$1552,388.73 $2,032,690,05 $4,821,885.00 



WATER: FUND EXPEN SES 


NHS In 
BUDGET 








STATUS QUO 

CHANGES 





20.15-16 

20X3-16 ■ ; ; 

REVISED 

WITH DVv'SD & 


2013-14 

2014 .15 : 

JOSS IS 

BUDGET 

X BUDGET 

2015-16 ’ 

All CAPITA!, 


Acrmr? 

AMENDED : 

APPROVED 

CHANGES 

f.li.TNGES 

BUDGET 

FUNDING 

Gt NUM8ES DESCRIPTION 


BUDGET 

BUDGET 

FOR OWED 

■ORC'.VSCJ 

WITH DVV5D 

ELIMINATED 

Expenses - Water Fund 

















ix-.r..- 

,$6>6.?77 

■ ■: $•>:}>,$>■ : 



: .'; $4'j$;s$l - -:: 


• £*p&«a*d tonfevebidnx*- 



$>>320,000 


-it.": "Tot :' 

' $2 y S?Mw • • • 

■ V : : V '• :$5c; : 3>4 : >A>v7 

Other Caipcnisv. . 

•® J i' ; 

; : ,: SS.WS,?K! 

• - ! $2,243750 ; 



' $2,24S:7S6 










• Wag*$4hd ?p'r$pK 

Si$?S« 

$226,451, 

•.;•■■■- -i. 



$756,443, 


Rtfp$\Y$ arvi !)V)pr6v4Ktfetft£ 

S.VW.S5* 

$3?4.4vO 

soso.coc : 


Jo 

$850,006 

, : ;5;.vlvV’X.'->> 

px**r : typings 

$10^50 

.$4?7;2S2 

- > .4 ’>-15 


: ::|h|:|| So 

$.647:649' 


t>epr $40.200' WavMetw Bftatffos* > Water 








KyzguraitiS'ftfttfps . 

Wi&si 

54882165 

:64aS;51E < 


$0 

" ::.:ai..53.s ■■'■■ 


Other! E^enw* ' 

$153*884. 

$54,050 

ISfSs:ooo 


X :. 

■'■■..■■ $M/J0C : : 


0erM:54OJO2-Wsc-Wxitef Oittributfon Msta* 








3t)i! rt(tv&<es 

^|'3SS,SP8 

^3,c‘04,$30 

$3,024,622 


4o 

■; i - ■;. • 


R*patfs.'5nVlmj»rev«m*nti 

liv, $391 

$««,<»» ; : i 

: 485,000 


• $0 

-SSiitsifty:?-: 


Othftt . 

5U:<s;n$ 

sows? 

■■:, : : $$is,h>6:; : 


$0 

$644,300 

»-. i>( UW(X:.vV.<s*i ■•!.:.•« •),„;, '.Mi:„; s 








V$a£«i«n<)?'tne.» 

■ : ,: . $388,523. 

51.s:7,0»8 

: 55,781,02? 

Staffing 



Si.aSCBW 


andiw^rnvXtty^te 

. 548,723 

$3D/704 

■ : $80,000 



: : IS:0 

■ ^• ; $v.0vC;: 

' Suprt fiai, WHfttet aftcf 06>af 

shj&.ws 

$3742,656 


dusige 0W5O 

$3.0.380.400 

: $i$^60,446 






Commodity dtgOWSO 

- g^gfiks: . -. 







ChemJcat P*tch«w 








Efecifice! r-oiyc-f 




545.3G2'Wax*riPl«ttt - Oam Operation? 

B : .: : 

?’2 




$o. : : . > 


auUSUBL»ii»^.J!ni , 

ilij: l:::S-l>S,*Jft;:;::'::''i : l 

'■■' 

50 : 



I.: TO: i'.yxp:: 


Oept.Sft JBO- Water Plant Usual tinjiiwsrafiMi: 








:Rspa(fVahct 9«dw^T>ests 

;ss»,si$ 

52.90JJ.0aC 

St .XU TOC 



• Sl^obb; ' •• 

.,: " 'iS.CM-lVSC: 

s::®:ffi:§ssB;s 

iii i i i ; i i i j i Ssisfsiisi ; ii: i i ; i : 

5 ; 5.70«,oilC. 

:;i:;gTSsM8<$i:660S:: 





t>eji« bop.lO&Qotf. /tf igcatitw Retiree Hejjftfjws 

$3,1U4S2 

%%&X>.Z&2 

: $T.OT7,57? 





O^CSS&iOJ.KE^ 

:i|| i : : : 


$1,150,00*) 






5K'; : ::'::|::52^ 

.$>,633,071. 

IlWlO 



§1131111$^ 


Oept S40.3G6-Csfiifcsl Improvement 








• ' ' K^b'a'fcj and (tn^ove'fjwts 

$0 

42,861}, 036 

if.aeaefo : 





■ -bth&t 

. $0 

5588,000 

: .'■ : $550,000 



$$'3t\DQb; . 


W^sej. -ir.d fringe:. 

$6:1,2113 . 

$0 

■■' 523.H3 



- -$2S.3iif- . • • 






: .:i: 

::ol4:9::3i^:'7v : ::59o5^4s. ' 

$'3i38.*S2 



$mi22 .■ 


§45.201 mow PI 

ant'Mai frtcn’ara&'. 









: Wag«i jart'd-rflogfis ' 

■ $i.asn,w? 





$X>27,3&' . 



. ^pais^'anrf'^prcK'SfTvsiifs 

5s.v;; 

,: :;i4; : .7 : o74 STe.#;: 

izs.m ■ 






• : C’tfv>? *; 


A: A,' ss/iaa 

$6$9,S>3£> 



• -5^V:6r; 


5-»i ?;r if p-yst^op 


■ so 

$sa.i>ou 

$5$4:£>00- - 



• $$ z^ow. ■ 




50 


$>> S73.?% : ., j 




• • • . 

Iota! Expenses 


$44,2:10,03? 

$37,757,035 

$37,886,000 


$20,265,692 

$58,151,692 

$48,576,942 




water mm revenues 




,'<<!S IS 


ill! 






STATUS QUO 

6UD6ET 

CHAOSES 







2015-56 

RSVISEO 

WITH 0W&7.& 



703.1-5 ft 

rot.i it 

S9£H(< 


9«0«ST 

201S IS 

AU CAPITAL 



At fiviry 

mmsm 

APPROVES 


EHAKSfS 

6U0SET 

fUVDJISKi 

,-! WIMW8 

OtVAIPSlON- 

•X'XiiiwwvrXii^Wivy 

8U0SST SUBSET 



«•*»»**?.. |fg ||||i|||;||!!|! 

Revenues Water fond 









Mins'? Water Sates 

$42„132£46 

$37,000,000 

$37,000,000 


$?0,265,iS92 

$57,265,692 5596 

$48,576,942 n% 


Oth£! Revenues 

$1,589,155 

$886,000 

$886,000 


$0 

$886,000 

$886,000 


Ait. el E.4i> 

$3,493,743 

$0 

$0 


50 

$o 

$0 


C ,sr<y QVftf 

$0 

$3, 703.. SOS 

$8 


$0 

$0 

$0 

Total Revenues 


$47,225,844 

$41,249,505 

$37,886,000 


$20,266,602 

$58,251,692 

$48,576,942 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 


Subject: 

Attachments: 


Maxine Murray < mmurray@cityofflint.com> 

Tuesday, April 14, 2015 2:54 PM 

Kapp, Gene (MSP); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Roberts, John (DTMB); Dempkowski, 
Angela (Treasury); Baird, Richard (GOV); Carter, Jerry (MSP); Deasy, Thomas (MSP); 
Koryzno, Edward (Treasury); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Elizabeth Murphy; Etue, Kriste 
(MSP); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Hill, Darryl (MSP); James Tolbert; Jerry Ambrose; Klotz, 
Josephine (MSP); Lee, Nichole (MSP); McGowan, Emmitt (MSP); Natasha Henderson; 
Smith, Paul (GOV); Byrne, Randall (Treasury); Sands, Thomas (MSP); Sipes, Stephen 
(MSP); O'Neill, Stephen (MSP); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Workman, Wayne 
(TREASURY); West, Samantha (GOV) 

Bi-Weekly Conference Call 

Agenda for Conference Call with Treasury 041515.xlsx; warer quality plan 4 14 15.pdf; 
Update St Transition Progress April 13 2015.pdf; Update 8i Transition Progress April 
13 2015 Media Release.pdf 


Good afternoon, 

Please find attached the agenda for the 9:00 am conference call scheduled for Wednesday, 
April 15, 2015. 

Thank you. 


Maxine Murray 

Executive Assistant to 

Mayor Dayne Walling 

Gerald Ambrose, Emergency Manager 

Natasha L. Elenderson, City Administrator 

1101 S. Saginaw Street 

Flint, MI 48502 

810.237.2035 Telephone 

810.766.7218 Fax 


l 




Page 1 of 2 









A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

28 


a) MDEQ Violation 
Notice 

Water is within federal/state guidelines. Violation notice and water 
update mailed last week. 


Complete 

29 


b) Drinking Water 
Revolving Fund 

Order #2 was issued to restructure and amend the debt service 
payments on the DWRF Bonds, by postponing the principal 
payments. Funds to be used to finance GAC installation and other 
recommendations 


Complete 

30 


c) Action plan on water 
quality 

Action plan based on consultant's recommendations has been 
developed and shared with Council and advisory committees. 
Approval of contract for installation of granulated activated 
charcoal (GAC) filter (primary recommendation) received from 
Treasury. 


Update 

m 







Page 2 of 2 














Pesip©£Q Approval I Prewamenl fcfctsfea&t 




RfP , ! Response { Contracl { ;Mpfe^te?tior! 


Fer v 'n*w » ' Repvfrs 


"viihlieia rials 


iMilil 


Cfwsi’iir.ton 


of Flint 

iptementation Plan 


Owner S 


Cast 


Support 


m/a! f-i/dpvv 


Clean Plate Settlers 


$10.000i F-1 / DRW 


Repair Ciartfrer 


liemieal Doslno & levels 


ISO F-1 / DRW 


600,000 LAN / DRW 


AGPurchase & Installation 


atefmam Leak Detection 


S-1 i DPW 


ramie Mattel & FfusSimq Program 


$173,700 LAN /DPW 


Miles of Pipe Replacement 


.1 63,000 


$4,846,700 

















































JeshlTeeman, 

.3 ©fry Manager 

t ...y% \i 

FlufoChy |||ui|cil 

Mayor Dayhe Walling 

Waiasha L. ;lleMerson,, ; City : Adinirfetra.tor 


April 13, 2,014 

Upda te and Transition, Progress 


Thank you Ibr your consideration of. ray request; f&x ruthorizafion to apply for the $7 million. loan 
from the State's Emergency Loan Board, '.t his loan, if approved, will he used to eliminate, the 
City's General Fund deficit ahead of the schedule in our current Deficit Eli m i nati on/R.eserve 
AcoufiinkfioH: Flan, ; Tills wifi efthbfe: the City to- move &fvyatfi: : with^ feildmg adeqnafo reserves 
heenssary to ihsiei fiiiMeial. stafeilfiljrt This, along with thc oommfohentsesi^ 
to develop and maintain a multi-year budget based on a strategic plan and to address the funding 
of long term liabilities, Flint's financial solvency can be sustainable. 

Thank you also for your consideration of the proposed consolidation of the 68* and 67 : " District 
Court ah action which has been long in the making. Recommended by the State Court 
Administrators Office :ahd authorized by state law,, the consolidation is planned to become 
effective dpnnary 2, 2016. The approved today by the Genesee 

Gpupiy Board ofiCpraraisfiohets, details: the adwMdges the ; consolidation will have lor file: City 
of Flint. The city will see a reduction in costs of more than $8.4 : million over the first 10 years, 
providing; sombannch needed fupds to support police sendees, AddMohally the. no w court, division, 
is assured; of at leastdprohatioriofficers, something which the Court has not had for several years. 
Apfi : as provided in both law and the agreement, ] edges will; continue to be elected from within 
the City. 

As you Enow, my focus over the past few months has been and continues to be transitioning the 
City from oversight by an Emergency. Manager to home ride under the guidance of a Receivership 
Transition Advisory Board. 




£ity .40fllM:« MSI §, Bpi^|pra ; 4iSlp 

WWwiMIvnSmLdpP: * i®ip f S6T1346 .* Ifipp fllSl TSSGMli: 


Flint City Council 
April 13, 2015 
Page 2 


Much progress has been made in preparing for the transition, including action by the City Council 
to complete the following: 

• Final adoption of the Capital Improvements Plan 

• Final adoption of ordinances regarding planning, budgeting, funds balance, and deficit 
elimination 

• Update of the Strategic Plan’s Vison, Mission, and Goals 

• Adoption of budget priorities to guide development of the F Y 1 6/F Y 1 7 budget 

Additionally, our new City Administrator Natasha Henderson is on board and is assuming duties 
as the experienced and professionally trained chief administrative officer for the City. 

There are several issues which we are continuing to address, including: 

• Water safety, quality, and affordability continues to be a top priority. The City’s water 
supply today is safe, as measured by the same MDEQ standards that have been in place for 
years, and steps are being taken to improve treatment and distribution processes in order to 
address issues of discoloration and odor, and to assure continued safety. Reviews of our 
pricing structure are also underway to assure that customers are treated equitably while 
generating sufficient revenue to operate the system. 

Public safety continues to be an area of critical concern. The independent study of our 
police and fire organization provided a number of recommendations focused on how to 
best deploy the resources we have, and also confirmed that the staffing levels afforded by 
our limited resources are extremely low in comparison to comparable municipalities. 

This emphasizes the critical continuing importance of renewing the two voter-approved 
public safety millages and working to assure continuing state support through the 
assignment of state troopers and through financial support of the City lock-up. Loss of 
any of this support would be a disaster for the City. 

• Achieving and then maintaining financial stability will continue to require constant 
attention. Approval of the ordinances regarding financial stability and the anticipated 
approval of the $7 million loan provide additional tools with which to work. Attention will 
need to be paid to not only developing and adopting budgets for FY 1 6 and F Y1 7 but doing 
so in the context of understanding the impact of those budgetary decisions into the 
following three years. Essential to this is making the budget decisions which truly address 
achievement of die stated vison, mission and goals for the City as adopted by the City 
Council. Unfortunately, the challenges in doing so will be great, as the City will continue 
to be faced with the reality of a structural deficit, where for the foreseeable future current 
expenditure patterns exceed revenue streams - a difficult position, given the City’s already 
low level of services. Complicating this further is the potential impact of the retiree health 
care lawsuit, once the final outcome is decided. 



Flint City Council 
April 13,2015 
Page 3 


• Finally progress continues with modernizing the operations of the City and setting the 
framework for future development. With the Master Plan and Capital Improvement Plan 
in place, focus is now turning to implementation, including updating the Zoning Ordinance. 

As we move forward with preparing for transition, there is much work yet to do. Today I am taking 
three actions consistent with our path: 

• Adoption of an updated purchasing policy - 1 am enacting the revisions to the Purchasing 
policy which were reviewed by Council within the past few months. These changes are 
made with the goal of assuring that the process of obtaining goods and services is consistent 
with the expectations of the Strategic Plan. There must be proper oversight and 
transparency, with a goal of obtaining goods and services that best meet the needs of City 
departments. The process must ensure competitive procurement, conducted in a timely and 
ethical manner. The City Council has an important role in assuring compliance with the 
policy, which is not the same as conducting purchasing operations. 

• Confirming the role of the City Administrator - Before the search for a new City 
Administrator was begun, it was determined, within the context of the Seven Point 
Transition Plan, that an experienced and professional City Administrator would be selected 
on the basis of an open competitive process, and that the duties of the City Administrator 
would be structured in a manner which assures the ability to manage and direct the 
administrative affairs of the City in a professional manner. While those duties and 
expectations were described in the job description of the City Administrator and in 
recruitment materials, I am now formally enacting them in Emergency Manager Order 
Number 3. 

• Re-establishing salaries for Mayor and Council - As we are moving towards transition, the 
duties and responsibilities of the Mayor and City Council are expanding towards the 
traditional roles of a City operating under home rule. Council meetings are now held twice 
per month, with committee meetings held once per month. The Mayor is now much more 
engaged in a Chief Executive role. Consequently, I have determined to re-establish the 
salaries for Mayor and Council at the levels in place immediately prior to the appointment 
of an Emergency Manager in November, 2011. Continued receipt of the re-established 
salaries, however, is contingent upon attainment of certain training. The re-established 
levels, and the contingency regarding training, is found in Emergency Manager Order 
Number 4. 

Over the next several weeks, there will be much work with respect to finalizing the loan application 
and developing the FY16 and FY17 budgets along with FY18, FY19, and FY20 projections. Work 
will also continue with implementing improvements of the water system, and reviewing our 
associated rate structure. Evaluation and implementation of the recommendations for best use of 



Flint City Council 
April 13,2015 
Page 4 


police and fire resources will continue, including corrective action for the police evidence room 
issues. Summer street maintenance and repair programs, as well as sidewalk repairs will soon be 
underway. Public meetings regarding the zoning ordinance are being held, with a recommended 
updated ordinance expected for consideration in late spring. A revision to the City’s business 
licensing ordinance is expected soon. These are but a few of the many activities to be expected as 
the City makes the best use of its resources to provide the best level of service it can within the 
resources it has. 

I look forward to working with you as we move towards transition to home rule under the guidance 
of a Receivership Transition Advisory Board. Please contact me if you have any questions. 




GENCY MANAGER 
CITY OF FLINT 



ORDER No. 3 



BY THE :.IW1R AND AlfTHDRlTY YBSIEDTN THE EMERGENCY MANAGER 
f BM^GEMCYMANAGErYTCM THE CITY 01' FLINT. MICHIGAN {“CITY’) 

EDRsuAHrm alt 4M of 20 ! 2 , eqgaltr^nciat 

STABILITY AND CHOICE ACT, f PA 436”); GERALD AMBROSE. THE EMERGENCY 
MANAGER. ISSUES THE FOLLOWING ORDER; 


Pbrstiahf tp PA : 43S f -the Emergency Manager has broad; powers m tecelverffilp to teefciiy the 
financial emergency and to fiscal tsf -tli€ City and its capacity to provide 

or eaase to be p-oyidpd . necessary :sprytpes esseeUa! to: the public health, safety and welfare: and 

Pursuant to PA 436, the Emergency Manager acts in place of local officials, specifically the 
May or- and -City Co togM, unless tlie : Emergency Manager ddiepfes specihc;aulhprity; and 

Pursuant to PA 436, ffie Ernergehcy Manager has broad power to; manage the local government, 
and may issue orders to elected and appointed officials necessary to accomplish the purpose of 
the Act. An (Mer issued fendhr: PA 436 is binding on the person to whom it is issued;: and 

IT IS HEREBY ORDERED: 

Thd City Administrator shall serve Officer at: the pleasure 

of the, Mayor, City Council and Emergency Manager or Receivership Advisory Transition Board 
(hereinafter “Board''), in. accordance with the proyiaions; of her contact with the City of Flint 



dated February 23, 2015, and is charged with implementing executive and legislative directives 
and policies of the Mayor and City Council, subject to oversight of the Board, including strategic 
planning and budgeting, and with directing the management of day-to-day-administrative 
activities and appointed staff officials. 

Consistent with the City Administrator Employment Agreement and Position Description, 
and subject to the approval and directives of the Board, the City Administrator shall have the 
following authority, duties and responsibilities notwithstanding any provision of the City Charter 
or Code of Ordinances: 

1. Serve, advise and report to the Mayor with respect to the Mayor’s executive functions, as 
set forth in Charter §4-101. 

2. Serve and advise the Council with respect to the Council’s legislative functions, as set 
forth in Charter §3-101. 

3. Serve, advise and report to the Emergency Manager, as required by Public Act 436, so 
long as an Emergency Manager is in place. 

4. Serve, advise and report to the Board, including: 

a. Advise and report to the Board as required by Public Act 436; 

b. Fully comply and assist the Board in meeting all duties assigned to it by the 
governor pursuant to MCL 141.1563(h); 

c. Provide all budgetaiy information requested by the Board; 

d. Serve as the primary contact between the Board and the City, including any 
department heads, officers, attorneys, accountants, employees, and any other 
contractors or consultants hired by the City to assist the City Administrator or the 
City in the discharge of powers, duties, functions, and responsibilities; 

e. Promptly and effectively communicate with the Board regarding any matter that 
may have a significant financial impact on the City. 

5. Direct City department heads in carrying out the daily activities of the City, in the 
assembly of financial and management information; and in the gathering and assembly of 
pertinent data and information and recommendations for the Mayor and City Council’s 
consideration in making executive determinations and policy. 

6. Translate executive decisions and policies of the Mayor into administrative procedures 
for the cost effective and efficient operation of the City. 

7. Implement legislative action of the City Council. 

8. Monitor and manage the administrative inter-activity of the City departments so the 
delivery of public services represents an efficient, effective, and coordinated effort. 

9. Interact with other governmental agencies as requested by the Mayor or City Council. 


2 



10. Prepare and review correspondence, reports, speeches, resolutions, and other material for 
public relations purposes. Answers citizen and official inquiries regarding City policy 
matters. 

11. In consultation with the Mayor, direct the assembly of infonnation and items for 
consideration by the Council, and provide them to the City Clerk for inclusion on the 
appropriate agendas. 

12. Regularly consult with the Mayor in the development of actions with respect to the 
Mayor’s executive functions, and with matters relating to the daily administrative 
functions of the City, including the evaluation of the performance of department heads, 
and the resolution of customer service issues. 

13. Except to the extent prohibited by or in material conflict with applicable laws and 
authorities, the City Administrator or designee shall attend all meetings of the City 
Council, both public and closed, with the exception of those closed meetings devoted to 
the consideration of any action or lack of action on, or pursuant to, this Agreement, or 
any amendment thereto, or the City Administrator's evaluation. The City Administrator 
shall advise members, and make recommendations consistent with policy objectives, 
strategic planning and administrative activities. 

14. Attend public meetings and events; give presentations and information to the public 
regarding matters of City business. 

15. Manage and oversee all department heads, division heads, managers and non-elected City 
employees. This shall include an annual written performance evaluation of all 
department heads, including those identified in paragraphs 15, 16 and 17. 

16. Recommend, subject to the Mayor’s approval, the following appointments: 

a. Chief of Police; 

b. Fire Chief; 

c. Director of Finance; 

d. Planning & Development Director; 

e. Director of Department of Public Works; 

f. Chief Legal Officer; 

g. Chief Personnel Officer. 

17. Recommend, subject to the Council’s approval, the following appointments: City Clerk 
and City Auditor. 

18. With the exception of those positions set forth in paragraphs 16 and 17, appoint all 
department heads, division heads and management positions, including the City 
Treasurer, Purchasing Director and the City Assessor, subject to any collective 
bargaining agreement(s) that may be applicable. 


3 



19. Ensure that all appointment processes, whether by the Mayor, Council or City 
Administrator, are open, competitive, and administered by the Human Resources 
Department or a qualified recruitment firm, with selection of the most qualified candidate 
to be based on defined education, experience, and professional standards appropriate to 
the position. 

20. All appointments made pursuant to paragraphs 15, 16 and 17 shall serve at the pleasure of 
the City Administrator based on performance review. 

21. Review current and potential litigation and labor disputes with the City Attorney and 
Mayor, and as needed the Board, and have complete decision making authority on behalf 
of the City, on all matters of litigation and labor disputes, including the ability to settle or 
initiate lawsuits and resolve labor disputes. The Mayor and City Council shall be 
consulted on such matters prior to implementation. 

22. Negotiate all collective bargaining agreements on behalf of the City. 

23. Work coilaboratively with the City Council, the Mayor, other City or State officials and 
the Board to successfully transition to the termination of receivership for the City by 
supporting, implementing, and maintaining the financial and operating plans and the 
reforms instituted by the City’s emergency managers, including but not limited to, the 
financial and operating plan for the city under Section II Act 436, and by providing 
appropriate training and explanation of City operations. 

24. Serve as an official City representative before the Board, State departments and agencies, 
and the Michigan Legislature, with assistance from the Finance Director and the Mayor. 

25. Be responsible for and vested with full authority necessary to effectively direct and 
supervise the day-to-day operations of the City by seeing that all laws and ordinances are 
faithfully executed, preparing the proposed annual budget as recommended by the 
Finance Director and any accounting firm retained by the City, and supervising the 
expenditures of all sums appropriated to and the attainment of all objectives established 
for departments of the executive branch of the City and working coilaboratively with all 
officers and officials to effectively execute daily operations. 

26. Ensure that a rolling six-year capital improvement plan is annually prepared in 
accordance with applicable law and the City’s Code of Ordinances. Coordinate with the 
Mayor on the annual preparation of a rolling two-year budget 

27. Review, approve and co-sign with the Mayor all contracts on behalf of and entered into 
by the City and modify or terminate any current contract with the City. 

28. Approve all financial policies. City policies and procedures, job descriptions and 
personnel policies for the City, after consultation with the Mayor and City Council. 

29. Designate check signers on all City bank accounts. 


4 



30. Refer Gft^ Gauxsetl communications to the appropriate City employee or investigate such 
maUer(s) and inform the City Council of the results of such efforts. Provided, however, 

the City Administrator shall have discretion to 
Ufiifee the personnel; and reasonaMd:and : ..so as to 

avoid unnecessary infemtpHoo: of seryiees or incurrence of louieeessary costs, 

TLAny Ipvesbgadon by the Goundl, as contemplated hy Otsrter §3-2(35 and P-206, 
including the power to subpoena witnesses,. shall hs subject lo : the Gify Administrator's 
review- and approval, so as bq : avoid ttnneeessary intemiption df sendees or lnetirf ehoe: of 
unnecessary costs. . 


32. In the event the Mayor or Council tails to perforin any duty or take any required action 
aher feaving hsen afforded artesasopuhle oppotliudity to dp: so, ;tbe City: Administrator may 
pertem the duty of Sinction of the Mayor or Council upon approval of the Board, 


This Order may be amended, modified, repealed: or lennloated by any sdbsequent Order issued 
by the Emergency Manager. ,.., s 


Dated: 


^ -./U- 




>T' Ao>' 




Gerald Ambrose 


Emergency Manager 
City of Flint 


%&i State of Michigan: Department of Treasury 

Mayor Dayne Walling 
hiintCityGounetf 
Inez Brown, Gity r Clerk 

Slut B^d©USbtAC^^\OfdftrNa : ae;itjv.A^ft>iffi^a{or.'U,T,30:L^:p^tt8b^!t 





by the power and authority nested m ibb ; emergency manager 

("BMER(^MCY.MAI^ : fSElJ.EOE,THE : CITY OF FLINT, MICHIGAN ("CFTY') 
PURSUANT TO MICE! GAN'S PUBLIC ACT 436 OF 2012, LOCAL FINANCIAL 
STABILITY AND CHOICE ACT. ("PA 436 ,! ); GERAL D AMBROSE. THE EMERGENCY 
MANAGER. ISSUES THE FOLLOWING ORDER: 


Pursuant to Public Act 436, the Emergency Manager has broad powers in receivership to rebtrfy 
the Shanclat emergency and to assure fee fiscal aecounmbillty of the C% ef EShtdod its capacity 
to provide or cause to be: poyidfd necessary services essential tothe public Health, safety 1 mtd 
welfare; and 

Pursuant to Public Act; the Emergency Manager acts M place Of local otTcialfe specifeOally 
the Mayor 1 and: City CoundL unless the Kraergency Manager HUcgates specific authority; and 

Pursuant to Buhlte Act 436, the Emergency Manager has broad power to manage the local 
gmrnimmii and may issue Orders to elected: and appointed tire 

purpose of the Act; and 

Pursuant to Public Act 436. City CowMI meetmgs are scheduled and. conducted at the discretion 
of the Emergency Manager; and 

An Order issued under PA 436 is binding on the person to whom it is issued; and 

Prior to the appointment of Emergency Manager Michael Brown on December ! , 20 ! ! , Mayor 
Dayne WalhUg' s annisl compensadon rate was $91 JQI; and 



Prior to the appointment of Emergency Manager . Michael Brown on December 1 , 201 1 , Flint City 
Council. President bad an annual compensation rate of $20356. City Council Vice President bad 
m annual compensation . rave of $2038 1 ; and, City -Coimcilrnembers; bad- &n annual compensation 
rale of $19307; and 

As the City of P'lir.it. moves toward iransi lien fbopt goyemateb and management by an Emergency 
Manager fo Hope Ml© with, oyerdght by a Board, fbu : 

responsibilities of the Mayor and Council are being increased. with the City Council now meeting 
regularly twice per month and Committees once per month 


MAf®' WaHingT duties jmdxe|pQ:rf and will further increase as the City of 

Flint progresses ■■$ a local: eoiitrob ; and 


Mayor Walling has completed !,evel One of Michigan Municipal i ,eague (MML) core courses lor 
municipal goypMBimt aiid; tpeeipt of tlid 'MML: Educa&m Award, as: retioircd by Emergency 
er Order 2 dated April 1.8, 201 I, and has otliemdsc : aecbmplishcd. the assigned tasks; and 


oh Ms. increased duties, respoBsibSitiea and peribrinanco, Mayor Wa|lmsg3 salary ta 
established at an annual compensation rate of $91,801, .effective April 13, 2015; and 


City OppnpiradiMfS: and :vpsppQSibililies : have Increased am! will further increase as the City of 
Flint progresses to loeal> control: ; and: 


Based on increased duties, the annual dompdnkMoft.fon th,® Flint City Council President shall be 
$20356; the City Council Vice: Ihpridcnt :shall be $20,381;; and ah other Council members shall 
fee effecbyC: April 13. 20.15; provided fepweytrif that tmtmcll members .must have 

completed the .Level One of Michigan .feniMpai League (MML) core courses for nnmicipal 
government and received the MML Education Award by November 1* 2015, and as certified by 
the City Council President, or their annual compensation shall be reduced to 
time as they have done so. 


Flie compensation set forth above shall continue until the Local Officers Compensation 
Commission convenes to establish the compensation for the Mayor and Council in accordance 
with M€L ! 1 f ,5c and Flint City Code, Chapter 2, Article 111, 

This Order is effective April 13, 2015. 


tfi.eE 


Order may be amended, modified, repealed or terminated by any subsequent Order issued by 

By: 




xc: 


State of Michigan Department of Treasury 
Mayor Dayne Walling 
Flint City Council 


Oerald Ambrose 
Emergency Manager 
City of Flint 



ORDINANCE NO. 


2>8{eS 


An Ordinance to amend the City of 
Flint Code of Ordinances by amending 
Chapter 18, Taxation; Funds; Purchasing; 
Article IV, Purchases. 

IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY THE 
PEOPLE OF THE CITY OF FLINT: 

Sec. 1. That the Ordinances of the City 
of Flint shall be amended by amending 
Chapter 18, Taxation; Funds; Purchasing; 
Article IV, Purchases; by updating Sections 
18-19 through 18-21.13; the renumbering of 
Section 18-21.14 to Section 18-21.20; and, the 
addition of new Sections 18-21.15 through 18- 
21.19, which shall read in its entirety as 
follows: 


ARTICLE IV: PURCHASING 
§ 18-18 SHORT TITLE. 

This ordinance shall be known and may be 
cited as the “Purchasing Ordinance of the City of 
Flint.” 

§ 18-19 DEFINITIONS. 

For the purposes of this article, the 
following terms, phrases, words, and their 
derivations shall have the meaning given h e r e in . 
When not inconsistent with the context, words 
used in the present tense include the future, words 
in the plural number include the singular number, 
and words in the singular number include the 
plural number. The word “shall” is always 
mandatory and not merely directory. 

AGENCY. Any department, office, 
multiple member body or other organization of 
City government and includes any elective 
officer, appointee or person acting or purporting 
to act in the exercise of official duties, but shall 
not include the Board of Hospital Managers. 


CHIEF EXECUTIVE. The Mayor of the 
City of Flint. 

CITY. The City of Flint, Michigan. 

CITY COUNCIL. The Council of the 

City of Flint. 

CONTRACTUAL SERVICES. All 
telephone, gas, water, electric light and power 
service; towel and cleaning service; insurance; 
leases for all grounds, buildings, office or other 
space required by the agencies, with the exception 
of property under the control of the Housing 
Commission, Department of Community 
Development or any independent multiple 
member board established in accordance with the 
provisions of the FLINT CITY Charter; and the 
rental, repair or maintenance of equipment, 
machinery and other City owned personal 
property. The term shall not include professional 
and other contractual services which THAT have 
been proven to be unique and not subject to 
competition. 

DIRECTOR. The Director of Purchases 
amT-Supplies PURCHASING DIRECTOR 
AND/OR PURCHASING MANAGER. 

PROCUREMENT CARD. 

SUPPLIES. All supplies, materials and 
equipment. 

§ 18-20 DIRECTOR OF PURCHASES -AND 
SUPPLIES PURCHASING DIRECTOR. 

There is hereby created the position of 
PURCHASING Director of Purchases — and 
Supplies who shall be a member of the Classified 
Service and shall be appointed by the Mayor 
CITY ADMINISTRATOR with the approval of 
the City Council. The PURCHASING Director 
shall perform all duties as provided h e rein BY 
THIS ORDINANCE AND THE FLINT CITY 
CHARTER under the direction of the Mayer 
CITY ADMINISTRATOR and shall perform 
such ALL other duties as may be prescribed by 
the Mayer CITY ADMINISTRATOR. 

1 








ofdaborato r y facilit i es of any agency of th e City 
government or of any outside-laboratory. 

§ 18 21.12 SURPLUS SUPPLIES. 

All using agencies shall submit to th e 
Director, at such tim e s and in such form as h e 
shall presc ri be, an inventory of all supplies which 
■ ar e — no -longer used or which hav e become 
obso le t e? 

(a) — ¥mm fer. The Dir e ctor - shall have th e 
authority - to - transf e r surplus -so pp - h e s - ^e -o t - her 
ag e nei e s. - 

(b) — Sale. Th e -Di rector - sh - a - li -h ave - th e 
anfeeHty-t o-s e l l- aU - snppiies - which - h ave- b e eem e 
aRsaitabl e- fof-public - as o ,-or - to -e- xc - hang e- tb e -sam e 
for,- or - trad e- i n - lh e- aam e on , n e w - sapp - lies ■ ■■ 

(4) G-empctitive - bidding — Sal es 

u nd e r this - - section shall be - ma de- to - t - he 
■ high e st — r es pon sible — bidd e r — and — is 
e ( > n - for - nvanc e- w itb-4$- - l -8- 2 1 S or - 4 - 8 - 2 1 .6 
h e r e of which e ver is applicable. 

§ 1 8 21,13 COOPERATIVE PURCHASING. 

Th e Director shall hav e th e authority to 
join - with - other unit s ofgovernm e nt in cooperativ e 
purchasing - plans - wh e n the best interests of th e 
Ci ty would - be s e rv e d thereby. - 

§ 18-21 PURPOSE AND SCOPE. 

THE VISION FOR THE CITY IS A 
WELL-MANAGED, FINANCIALLY 

STABLE, AND ACCOUNTABLE 
GOVERNMENT FOCUSED ON CREATING 
AND MAINTAINING A VIBRANT AND 
GROWING COMMUNITY THAT WILL 
ATTRACT AND RETAIN RESIDENTS, 
BUSINESSES, STUDENTS AND VISITORS 
AND IMPROVE QUALITY OF LIFE. THE 
CITY’S MISSION IS TO ASSURE THAT 
RESIDENTS, BUSINESSES, STUDENTS 
AND VISITORS RECEIVE MUNICIPAL 
SERVICES IN A CUSTOMER FRIENDLY 


AND FINANCIALLY RESPONSIBLE 
MANNER. 

STRUCTURING CITY 

OPERATIONS TO ACHIEVE THIS 
MISSION AND VISION HAVE REQUIRED 
THE ESTABLISHMENT OF LONG RANGE 
STRATEGIC PLANNING AND 
BUDGETING. EQUALLY IMPORTANT IS 
ESTABLISHING THE PRINCIPLES BY 
WHICH GOODS AND SERVICES WILL BE 
OBTAINED. 

THE PROCESS OF OBTAINING 
GOODS AND SERVICES MUST BE 
CONSISTENT WITH THE STRATEGIC 
PLAN. THERE MUST BE PROPER 
OVERSIGHT AND TRANSPARENCY, 
WITH A GOAL OF OBTAINING THE 
GOODS AND SERVICES THAT BEST 
MEET THE NEEDS OF CITY 
DEPARTMENTS. THE PROCESS MUST 
ENSURE COMPETITIVE PROCUREMENT 
CONDUCTED IN AN ETHICAL AND 
TIMELY MANNER IN ORDER FOR THE 
CITY TO CARRY OUT ITS DUTIES. USE 
OF CITY RESOURCES FOR PERSONAL 
USE IS GROUNDS FOR TERMINATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT AND POSSIBLE 
CRIMINAL PROSECUTION. 

PURCHASING GOODS AND 
SERVICES SUPPORTS THE BUSINESSES 
AND COMMUNITIES IN WHICH THE 
BUSINESSES RESIDE. ACCORDINGLY, 
WHEN FEASIBLE, IN TERMS OF 
QUALITY, COST, AND ACCESSIBILITY, 
THE CITY SHOULD MAKE GOOD FAITH 
EFFORTS TO PROCURE GOODS AND 
SERVICES FROM BUSINESSES WITH A 
PHYSICAL LOCATION WITHIN THE 
CITY LIMITS, AND IF NOT ABLE TO DO 
SO, TO MAKE SIMILAR EFFORTS WITH 
RESPECT TO BUSINESSES PHYSICALLY 
LOCATED IN GENESEE COUNTY 
AND/OR SURROUNDING COMMUNITIES. 

§ 18-21.1 ASSIGNMENT OF 

RESPONSIBILITY. 

8 



THE FLINT CITY COUNCIL SHALL 
BE RESPONSIBLE FOR PERIODICALLY 
REVIEWING AND UPDATING THIS 
ORDINANCE, FOR MONITORING 
PURCHASING ACTIVITIES AS 
DESCRIBED WITHIN THIS ORDINANCE, 
AND APPROVING PURCHASES AS 
DESCRIBED WITHIN THIS ORDINANCE 
TO ASSURE THAT GOODS AND 
SERVICES OBTAINED BEST MEET THE 
NEEDS OF CITY DEPARTMENTS AND 
ARE OBTAINED IN A COMPETITIVE, 
TRANSPARENT, ETHICAL AND TIMELY 
MANNER THAT PERMITS THE CITY TO 
CARRY OUT ITS DUTIES. 

THE MAYOR SHALL BE 
RESPONSIBLE FOR EXECUTIVE 
OVERSIGHT OF THE PURCHASING OF 
ALL GOODS AND SERVICES FOR THE 
CITY, FOR APPROVING PURCHASES AS 
PROVIDED IN THIS ORDINANCE, AND 
FOR ASSURING THAT CITY COUNCIL IS 
PROVIDED TIMELY INFORMATION TO 
ENABLE IT TO CARRY OUT ITS 
OVERSIGHT RESPONSIBILITIES. 

THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR 
SHALL PROVIDE ADMINISTRATIVE 
OVERSIGHT OF THE PURCHASING 
FUNCTION, FOR APPROVING 
PURCHASES AS PROVIDED IN THIS 
ORDINANCE, AND FOR PROVIDING THE 
CITY COUNCIL TIMELY INFORMATION 
TO ENABLE IT TO CARRY OUT ITS 
OVERSIGHT RESPONSIBILITIES. 

THE FINANCE DIRECTOR SHALL 
SUPERVISE THE ACTIVITIES OF THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR, AND SHALL 
WORK WITH THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR, DEPARTMENT HEADS AND 
OTHERS TO ASSURE THAT PROPER 
BUDGETARY AUTHORITY EXISTS FOR 
THE PURCHASE OF GOODS AND 
SERVICES. 


THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR 
SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE 
PROCUREMENT OF ALL GOODS AND 
SERVICES FOR THE CITY UNLESS 
OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS 
ORDINANCE. THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR SHALL ASSURE THAT ALL 
GOODS AND SERVICES ARE OBTAINED 
IN A COMPETITIVE AND ETHICAL 
MANNER AND IN COMPLIANCE WITH 
THE PROCESSES ESTABLISHED IN THIS 
ORDINANCE. THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR SHALL ALSO APPROVE 
PURCHASES AS PROVIDED IN THIS 
ORDINANCE. THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR SHALL ALSO DEVELOP AND 
RECOMMEND TO THE MAYOR THE 
APPROPRIATE PROCESSES AND 

PROCEDURES TO MEET THE 

REQUIREMENTS OF THIS ARTICLE. 

DEPARTMENT HEADS AND 

PERSONNEL DESIGNATED BY 

DEPARTMENT HEADS SHALL HAVE THE 
AUTHORITY TO OBTAIN GOODS AND 
SERVICES AS AUTHORIZED IN THIS 
ARTICLE. THE DESIGNATED 
PERSONNEL SHALL ALSO PROVIDE THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR WITH THE 
INFORMATION NEEDED TO ASSURE 
THAT THE GOODS AND SERVICES TO BE 
OBTAINED ARE IN THE BEST INTERESTS 
OF THE CITY. 

ALL PERSONS WHO ARE 
AUTHORIZED TO PURCHASE GOODS 
AND SERVICES FOR THE CITY SHALL BE 
RESPONSIBLE FOR ASSURING THAT 
PURCHASES MADE IN THE BEST 
INTERESTS OF THE CITY, ARE 
OBTAINED ON A COMPETITIVE BASIS 
AS REQUIRED BY THIS ARTICLE, AND 
ARE DONE IN AN ETHICAL MANNER. 

§ 18-21.2 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. 

THERE MUST BE PROPER 
OVERSIGHT AND TRANSPARENCY 
WITH RESPECT TO THE PURCHASE OF 
9 



GOODS AND SERVICES, WITH A GOAL 
OF OBTAINING GOODS AND SERVICES 
THAT BEST MEET THE NEEDS OF CITY 
DEPARTMENTS. THE PROCESS MUST 
ENSURE COMPETITIVE PROCUREMENT 
CONDUCTED IN A TIMELY AND 
ETHICAL MANNER IN ORDER FOR THE 
CITY TO CARRY OUT ITS DUTIES. ALL 
PARTIES DELEGATED AUTHORITY 
WITH RESPECT TO ALL PURCHASES OF 
GOODS AND SERVICES ARE CHARGED 
WITH THE RESPONSIBILITY OF 
MAKING PURCHASES IN A 
COMPETITIVE AND ETHICAL MATTER, 
AND FOR ADHERING IN ALL RESPECTS 
TO THE CITY OF FLINT CODE OF 
CONDUCT POLICY. 

THE AUTHORITY WITH RESPECT 
TO THE PURCHASE OF ALL GOODS AND 
SERVICES IS DELEGATED AS PROVIDED 
HEREIN: 

DEPARTMENT HEADS AND 
EMPLOYEES SPECIFICALLY 

DESIGNATED BY DEPARTMENT HEADS, 
AND APPROVED BY THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR, SHALL BE ELIGIBLE TO BE 
ISSUED PROCUREMENT CARDS, AND 
ARE AUTHORIZED TO PURCHASE 
GOODS AND SERVICES FOR CITY 
PURPOSES, PROVIDED FUNDS ARE 
APPROPRIATELY BUDGETED AND THAT 
THE DEPARTMENT HEAD OR 
DESIGNATED EMPLOYEE FORMALLY 
AGREE TO ALL PROVISIONS 
REGARDING THE USE AND 
RECONCILEMENT OF THE CARDS, AS 
PRESCRIBED BY THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR. THE AMOUNT OF GOODS 
AND SERVICES PURCHASED IN ONE 
MONTH MAY NOT EXCEED $10,000, 
UNLESS SPECIFIC AUTHORIZATION IS 
APPROVED BY THE FINANCE 
DIRECTOR, CITY ADMINISTRATOR, 
AND MAYOR UPON THE 
RECOMMENDATION OF THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR. THE 

PURCHASING DIRECTOR MAY SUSPEND 


USE OF PROCUREMENT CARDS FOR 
FAILURE TO FOLLOW ESTABLISHED 
PROCESSES AND PROTOCOLS. USE OF 
PROCUREMENT CARDS FOR PERSONAL 
OR OTHER NON-CITY USE IS A 
VIOLATION OF THE CITY’S CODE OF 
CONDUCT POLICY AND MAY BE 
GROUNDS FOR TERMINATION AND 
POSSIBLE CRIMINAL PROSECUTION. 

DEPARTMENT HEADS AND 
EMPLOYEES AUTHORIZED BY 
DEPARTMENT HEADS MAY REQUEST 
THE PURCHASE OF GOODS AND 
SERVICES BY FILING A PROPERLY 
COMPLETED REQUISITION WITH THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR. UPON 
RECEIPT OF THE REQUISITION, AND 
DOCUMENTATION THAT FUNDS HAVE 
BEEN PROPERLY BUDGETED, THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR SHALL CAUSE 
THE SOLICITATION OF REQUESTS FOR 
THE PURCHASE OF THE GOODS AND 
SERVICES TO BE MADE, FOLLOWING 
THE APPROPRIATE PROCESSES. 

THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR 
SHALL ADHERE TO THE FORMAT OF 
THE SELECTED PROCESS AS DETAHED 
IN THE FOLLOWING SECTIONS: 

§ 18-21.3 COMPETITIVE SEALED 

BIDDING. 

(1) CONDITIONS FOR USE. ALL 
PROCUREMENT REQUESTS FOR THE 
CITY SHALL BE AWARDED BY THE USE 
OF COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDDING 
EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN 
SECTIONS 18-21.4 (COMPETITIVE 
SEALED PROPOSALS), 18-21.5 
(QUALIFICATIONS BASED SELECTION), 
18-21.6 (SMALL PURCHASES), 18-21.7 
(PUBLIC ENTITY PROCUREMENTS), 18- 
21.8 (SOLE SOURCE PROCUREMENT), 
AND 18-21.9 (EMERGENCY 

PROCUREMENTS), OF THIS ARTICLE. 


10 



(2) INVITATION FOR BIDS. AN 

INVITATION FOR BIDS SHALL BE 
ISSUED AND SHALL INCLUDE 
SPECIFICATIONS AND ALL 

CONTRACTUAL TERMS AND 

CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO THE 
PROCUREMENT. 

(3) PUBLIC NOTICE. 

ADEQUATE PUBLIC NOTICE OF THE 
INVITATION FOR BIDS SHALL BE GIVEN 
NOT LESS THAN TEN (10) CALENDAR 
DAYS PRIOR TO THE DATE SET FORTH 
FOR THE OPENING OF BIDS. THE 
NOTICE MAY INCLUDE PUBLICATION 
ON THE CITY’S WEBSITE, ANY 
ELECTRONIC MEDIA SERVICE, OR 
NEWSPAPER OF GENERAL 

CIRCULATION WITHIN TEN (10) DAYS 
PRIOR TO BID OPENING. THE PUBLIC 
NOTICE SHALL STATE THE PLACE, 
DATE, AND TIME OF BID OPENING. 

(4) BID OPENING. BIDS MAY BE 
OPENED PUBLICLY IN THE PRESENCE 
OF ONE OR MORE WITNESSES AT THE 
TIME AND PLACE DESIGNATED OR 
RECORDED AND PUBLISHED IN AN 
ELECTRONIC INVITATION FOR BIDS 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. THE AMOUNT 
OF EACH BID, AND ALL OTHER 
RELEVANT INFORMATION, AS THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR DEEMS 
APPROPRIATE, TOGETHER WITH THE 
NAME OF EACH BIDDER SHALL BE 
RECORDED. THE RECORD AND EACH 
BID SHALL BE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC. 

(5) BID ACCEPTANCE AND BID 

EVALUATION. BIDS SHALL BE 
UNCONDITIONALLY ACCEPTED 

WITHOUT ALTERATION OR 
CORRECTION, EXCEPT AS 

AUTHORIZED HEREIN. BIDS SHALL BE 
EVALUATED BASED ON THE 
REQUIREMENTS SET FORTH IN THE 
INVITATION FOR BIDS, WHICH MAY 
INCLUDE CRITERIA TO DETERMINE 
ACCEPTABILITY SUCH AS INSPECTION, 


TESTING, QUALITY, WORKMANSHIP, 
DELIVERY, AND SUITABILITY FOR A 
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. THOSE 
CRITERIA THAT WILL AFFECT THE BID 
PRICE AND BE CONSIDERED IN THE 
EVALUATION FOR AWARD SHALL BE 
OBJECTIVELY MEASURABLE, SUCH AS 
DISCOUNTS, TRANSPORTATION COSTS, 
AND TOTAL OR LIFE CYCLE COSTS. 
THE INVITATION FOR BIDS SHALL SET 
FORTH THE EVALUATION CRITERIA TO 
BE USED. 

(6) CORRECTION OR 

WITHDRAWAL OF BIDS; CANCELLATION 
OF AWARDS. CORRECTIONS OR 
WITHDRAWAL OF INADVERTENTLY 
ERRONEOUS BIDS BEFORE OR AFTER 
BID OPENING, OR CANCELLATION OF 
AWARDS OR CONTRACTS BASED ON BID 
MISTAKES, MAY BE PERMITTED 
WHERE APPROPRIATE. MISTAKES 
DISCOVERED BEFORE BID OPENING 
MAY BE MODIFIED OR WITHDRAWN BY 
WRITTEN OR ELECTRONIC NOTICE 
RECEIVED IN THE OFFICE DESIGNATED 
IN THE INVITATION FOR BIDS PRIOR TO 
THE DEADLINE FOR SUBMISSION OF 
THE BID. 

(7) LOCAL PREFERENCE. 

FROM THE BIDDERS DETERMINED TO 
BE RESPONSIBLE, THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR, IN CONSULTATION WITH 
THE DEPARTMENT HEAD REQUESTING 
THE GOODS OR SERVICES, SHALL 
DETERMINE THE RECOMMENDED BID 
AWARD. FROM AMONG THE 

RESPONSIBLE BIDDERS, THE 
RECOMMENDED AWARD SHALL BE TO 
THE LOWEST BIDDER; PROVIDED, 
THAT IN DETERMINING THE LOWEST 
BID, THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR 
SHALL CONSIDER THE BONA FIDE 
BUSINESS LOCATION OF THE BIDDER. 
IF THE LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER 
IS NOT LOCATED WITHIN THE CITY 
LIMITS, AND THE LOWEST BID OF THE 
RESPONSIBLE BIDDERS LOCATED 

11 



WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS DOES NOT 
EXCEED THAT OF THE LOWEST NON- 
LOCAL BIDDER BY MORE THAN SEVEN 
PERCENT (7%), THEN THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR SHALL BE ALLOWED TO 
REQUEST THE LOWEST LOCAL 
VENDOR MATCH THE PRICE OFFERED 
BY THE LOWEST NON-LOCAL VENDOR. 
ADDITIONALLY, IF THE LOWEST 
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER IS NOT LOCATED 
WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS, AND THE 
LOWEST BID OF THE RESPONSIBLE 
BIDDER LOCATED WITHIN GENESEE 
COUNTY DOES NOT EXCEED THE BID OF 
THE LOWEST NON-LOCAL BIDDER BY 
MORE THAN THREE AND ONE-HALF 
PERCENT (3.5%), THEN THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR SHALL BE 
ALLOWED TO REQUEST THE LOWEST 
LOCAL VENDOR MATCH THE PRICE 
OFFERED BY THE LOWEST NON-LOCAL 
VENDOR. 

(8) APPROVAL THRESHOLDS . 

THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR, IN 
CONSULTATION WITH THE 

DEPARTMENT HEAD SHALL JOINTLY 
RECOMMEND THE AWARD OF A BID 
UNDER THIS SECTION. IF THE BID 
AWARD IS LESS THAN $20,000, THE 
DECISION OF THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR SHALL BE FINAL. IF THE 
RECOMMENDED BID AWARD IS IN 
EXCESS OF $20,000, IT SHALL ALSO BE 
APPROVED BY THE FINANCE 
DIRECTOR; IF IN EXCESS OF $30,000, IT 
SHALL ALSO BE APPROVED BY THE 
CITY ADMINISTRATOR; AND, IF IN 
EXCESS OF $50,000, IT SHALL ALSO BE 
APPROVED BY THE MAYOR. ANY 
RECOMMENDED BID AWARDS IN 
EXCESS OF $75,000 SHALL ALSO BE 
APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL. 

(9) ADJUSTMENTS TO 

NEGOTIATED AWARDS. IN THE EVENT 
THE SUCCESSFUL BIDDER WAS FOR A 
PROJECT THAT EXCEEDS AVAILABLE 
FUNDS AS CERTIFIED BY THE FINANCE 


DIRECTOR, THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR IS AUTHORIZED, WHEN 
TIME OR ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS 
PRECLUDE RE-SOLICITATION OF 
WORK OF A REDUCED SCOPE, TO 
NEGOTIATE AN ADJUSTMENT OF THE 
BID PRICE WITH THE LOWEST 
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER, IN ORDER TO 
BRING THE BID WITHIN THE AMOUNT 
OF AVAILABLE FUNDS. ANY 
NEGOTIATED ADJUSTMENT SHALL BE 
BASED ONLY UPON ELIMINATING 
INDEPENDENT DEDUCTIVE ITEMS 
SPECIFIED IN THE INVITATION FOR 
BIDS. 

(10) MULTI-STEP SEALED 

BIDDING. WHEN IT IS CONSIDERED 
IMPRACTICAL TO INITIALLY PREPARE 
A PURCHASE DESCRIPTION TO 
SUPPORT AN AWARD BASED ON PRICE, 
AN INVITATION FOR QUALIFICATIONS 
MAY BE ISSUED REQUESTING THE 
SUBMISSION OF UN-PRICED OFFERS TO 
BE FOLLOWED BY AN INVITATION FOR 
BIDS LIMITED TO THOSE BIDDERS 
WHOSE OFFERS HAVE BEEN 
DETERMINED TO BE TECHNICALLY 
ACCEPTABLE UNDER THE CRITERIA 
SET FORTH IN THE FIRST 
SOLICITATION. 

§ 18-21.4 COMPETITIVE SEALED 

PROPOSALS. 

(1) CONDITIONS FOR USE. 
WHEN THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR 
DETERMINES THAT THE USE OF 
COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDDING IS 
EITHER NOT PRACTICABLE OR NOT 
ADVANTAGEOUS TO THE CITY, A 
CONTRACT FOR THE PURCHASE OF 
GOODS OR SERVICES MAY BE ENTERED 
INTO BY USE OF THE COMPETITIVE 
SEALED PROPOSALS METHOD. 

(2) REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS. 
PROPOSALS SHALL BE SOLICITED 
THROUGH A WRITTEN AND 

12 



PUBLICALLY NOTICED REQUEST FOR 
PROPOSALS FORMAT. 

(3) PUBLIC NOTICE. 

ADEQUATE PUBLIC NOTICE OF THE 
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS SHALL BE 
GIVEN IN THE SAME MANNER AS 
PROVIDED IN SECTION 18-21.3(3) 
(COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDDING, 
PUBLIC NOTICE). THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR WILL DETERMINE THE 
AMOUNT OF TIME IN WHICH REQUESTS 
WILL BE SOLICITED. 

(4) RECEIPT OF PROPOSALS. 
PROPOSALS SHALL BE PREPARED 
CONTAINING THE NAME OF EACH 
RESPONDENT, THE NUMBER OF 
MODIFICATIONS RECEIVED, IF ANY, 
AND A DESCRIPTION SUFFICIENT TO 
IDENTIFY THE ITEM OFFERED. THE 
PROPOSALS SHALL BE OPEN FOR 
PUBLIC INSPECTION ONLY AFTER 
BEING PUBLISHED. 

(5) DISCLOSURE OF 

RESPONDENTS, CONTENTS. THE 
CONTENTS OF ANY PROPOSAL SHALL 
NOT BE DISCLOSED TO COMPETING 
RESPONDENTS UNTIL AFTER BEING 
PUBLISHED. 

(6) EVALUATION FACTORS. 
THE REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS SHALL 
STATE THE RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF 
PRICE AND OTHER EVALUATION 
FACTORS. 

(7) DISCUSSION WITH 

RESPONSIBLE RESPONDENTS AND 
REVISIONS TO PROPOSALS. AS 
PROVIDED IN THE REQUEST FOR 
PROPOSALS, DISCUSSIONS MAY BE 
CONDUCTED WITH RESPONSIBLE 
RESPONDENTS WHO SUBMIT 
PROPOSALS DETERMINED TO BE 
REASONABLY SUSCEPTIBLE OF BEING 
SELECTED FOR AWARD FOR THE 
PURPOSE OF CLARIFICATION TO 


ASSURE FULL UNDERSTANDING OF, 
AND CONFORMANCE TO, THE 
SOLICITATION REQUIREMENTS. 

RESPONDENTS WHO SUBMITTED 
PROPOSALS DETERMINED TO BE 
REASONABLY SUSCEPTIBLE OF BEING 
SELECTED FOR AWARD SHALL BE 
ACCORDED FAIR AND EQUAL 
TREATMENT WITH RESPECT TO ANY 
OPPORTUNITY FOR DISCUSSION AND 
REVISION OF PROPOSALS, AND 
REVISIONS MAY BE PERMITTED AFTER 
SUBMISSIONS AND PRIOR TO AWARD 
FOR THE PURPOSE OF OBTAINING BEST 
AND FINAL OFFERS. 

(8) LOCAL PREFERENCE. 

UNLESS THE FUNDING SOURCE FOR 
THE CONTRACT PROHIBITS SUCH 
PREFERENCES, THE PREFERENCE FOR 
LOCAL VENDORS AS OUTLINED IN 
SECTION 18-21.3(7) SHALL BE 
CONSIDERED. 

(9) APPROVAL THRESHOLDS. 
THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR, IN 
CONSULTATION WITH THE 
DEPARTMENT HEAD, SHALL EVALUATE 
THE PROPOSALS AND RECOMMEND 
AWARD OF THE CONTRACT UNDER 
THIS SECTION. IF THE RECOMMENDED 
AWARD IS FOR LESS THAN $20,000, THE 
DECISION OF THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR SHALL BE FINAL. IF THE 
RECOMMENDED AWARD IS IN EXCESS 
OF $20,000, IT SHALL ALSO BE 
APPROVED BY THE FINANCE 
DIRECTOR; IF IN EXCESS OF $30,000, IT 
SHALL ALSO BE APPROVED BY THE 
CITY ADMINISTRATOR; AND, IF IN 
EXCESS OF $50,000, IT SHALL ALSO BE 
APPROVED BY THE MAYOR. ANY 
RECOMMENDED AWARD IN EXCESS OF 
$75,000 SHALL ALSO BE APPROVED BY 
THE CITY COUNCIL. 

§ 18-21.5 QUALIFICATIONS BASED 

SELECTION. 


13 



(1) CONDITIONS FOR USE. THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR MAY 
DETERMINE, WHEN REQUISITIONS 
HAVE BEEN RECEIVED, THAT PRE- 
QUALIFYING VENDORS FOR 
CONSIDERATION IS IN THE BEST 
INTERESTS OF THE CITY. 

(2) IN SUCH CASE, THE 

PURCHASING DIRECTOR, IN 
CONSULTATION WITH THE 

DEPARTMENT HEAD, SHALL DEVELOP 
A REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS 
THAT WILL DEFINE THE REQUEST TO 
BE SOUGHT AND THE NECESSARY 
QUALIFICATIONS A QUALIFIED 
RESPONDING ENTITY MUST HAVE IN 
ORDER TO BE QUALIFIED TO RESPOND 
TO A PROPOSAL REQUEST. 

(3) PUBLIC NOTICE. 

ADEQUATE PUBLIC NOTICE OF THE 
REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS SHALL 
BE GIVEN IN THE SAME MANNER AS 
PROVIDED IN SECTION 18-21.3(3) 
(COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDDING, 
PUBLIC NOTICE). 

(4) RECEIPT OF 

QUALIFICATIONS. A REGISTER OF 
QUALIFICATIONS SHALL BE PREPARED 
CONTAINING THE NAME AND 
QUALIFICATIONS OF EACH 

RESPONDENT. THE REGISTER OF 
QUALIFICATIONS SHALL BE OPEN FOR 
PUBLIC INSPECTION ONLY AFTER 
READ PUBLICLY. 

(5) EVALUATION OF 

SUBMISSIONS. THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR, IN CONSULTATION WITH 
THE DEPARTMENT HEAD, SHALL 
EVALUATE THE QUALIFICATIONS OF 
THE RESPONDENT AND SHALL 
PREPARE A LIST OF RESPONDENTS 
DESIGNATED AS QUALIFIED. THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR SHALL ALSO 
PREPARE AND MAINTAIN A LIST OF 
RESPONDENTS NOT DESIGNATED AS 
PRE-QUALIFIED, IDENTIFYING THE 


REASONS WHY THEY WERE NOT 
DESIGNATED AS PRE-QUALIFIED. 

(6) THE PURCHASING 

DIRECTOR WILL CAUSE TO BE 
PREPARED A REQUEST FOR 
COMPETITIVE SEALED PROPOSALS AS 
PROVIDED IN SECTION 18-21.1, AND 
ISSUED TO THE QUALIFIED 
RESPONDENTS. 

§ 18-21.6 SMALL PURCHASES. 

AS PROVIDED IN THIS ARTICLE, 
DEPARTMENT HEADS AND 

SPECIFICALLY DESIGNATED 

EMPLOYEES MAY BE ISSUED 
PROCUREMENT CARDS AND MAY 
PURCHASE GOODS AND SERVICES NOT 
EXCEEDING $10,000 PER MONTH. THE 
PURCHASES SHALL NOT BE 
ARTIFICIALLY DIVIDED SO AS TO 
CONSTITUTE A SMALL PURCHASE 
UNDER THIS SECTION. 

FOR PURCHASES UNDER $10,000 
PER MONTH, INCLUDING PURCHASES 
UTILIZING PROCUREMENT CARDS, THE 
DEPARTMENT HEAD AND AUTHORIZED 
EMPLOYEE SHALL, TO THE EXTENT 
POSSIBLE AND PRACTICAL AND IN THE 
BEST INTERESTS OF THE CITY, SOLICIT 
COMPETITIVE QUOTATIONS TO 
PROVIDE THE GOODS OR SERVICES 
SOUGHT. WHEN POSSIBLE AND 
PRACTICAL, A MINIMUM OF THREE (3) 
WRITTEN QUOTATIONS AND COPIES OF 
ALL QUOTATIONS SHALL BE PROVIDED 
TO THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR FOR 
SMALL PURCHASE REQUESTS. IN THE 
ABSENCE OF SUFFICIENT WRITTEN 
QUOTATIONS, THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR MAY ELECT TO SOLICIT 
ADDITIONAL QUOTATIONS. THEY 
SHALL ALSO GIVE CONSIDERATION, 
WHERE POSSIBLE AND PRACTICAL, TO 
BUSINESSES WITH A PHYSICAL 
LOCATION WITHIN THE CITY, OR IF 


14 



NOT POSSIBLE, WITHIN GENESEE AS DETERMINED BY THE 

COUNTY. PURCHASING DIRECTOR. 


THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR 
MAY ASSESS THESE PURCHASES AS TO 
THE FEASIBILITY OF FUTURE FORMAL 
COMPETITIVE PROCESSES FOR THE 
GOODS AND SERVICES BEING 
PROCURED IN THIS MANNER. 

§ 18-21.7 PUBLIC ENTITY PURCHASES. 

THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR IS 
AUTHORIZED, IF DETERMINED TO BE 
IN THE BEST INTERESTS OF THE CITY, 
TO PURCHASE GOODS AND SERVICES 
FOR THE CITY, RELYING ON 
COMPETITIVE PROCESSES 

UNDERTAKEN BY OTHER PUBLIC 
ENTITIES, INCLUDING THE FEDERAL 
GOVERNMENT, THE STATE OF 
MICHIGAN, MUNICIPALITIES, SPECIAL 
PURPOSE DISTRICTS AND 

AUTHORITIES, AND SCHOOL 
DISTRICTS. 

THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR 
MAY APPROVE OR RECOMMEND THE 
APPROVAL OF A CONTRACT WITH THE 
VENDOR WHO HAS A CONTRACT WITH 
ANOTHER PUBLIC ENTITY FOR GOODS 
OR SERVICES THAT THE CITY WOULD 
LIKE TO PURCHASE, IF AT A MINIMUM: 

(1) THE CONTRACT IS 
FOR THE SAME GOODS, 
SERVICES, OR CONSTRUCTION 
AND AT THE SAME PRICE, TERMS, 
AND CONDITIONS AS ARE IN THE 
CONTRACT WITH THE OTHER 
PUBLIC ENTITY; AND, 

(2) THE CONTRACT 

BETWEEN THE PERSON AND THE 
OTHER PUBLIC ENTITY WAS 
AWARDED IN A MANNER 

CONSISTENT WITH 

PROCUREMENT BEST PRACTICES 


§ 18-21.8 SOLE SOURCE PURCHASES. 

A PURCHASE ORDER 

AGREEMENT OR FORMAL WRITTEN 
CONTRACT FOR THE PURCHASE OF 
GOODS AND SERVICES MAY BE 
AWARDED IN THE DISCRETION OF THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR, WITHOUT A 
FORMAL COMPETITIVE PROCESS 
WHEN, AFTER CONDUCTING A GOOD 
FAITH REVIEW OF AVAILABLE 
SOURCES AND EXISTING EQUIPMENT, 
THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR 
DETERMINES THAT: 

(1) THERE IS ONLY ONE 

SOURCE FOR THE REQUIRED 
SUPPLY, SERVICE, OR 

CONSTRUCTION ITEM; OR 

(2) THE CHOSEN 

SOURCE IS THE BEST CHOICE IN 
THE INTERESTS OF EQUIPMENT 
STANDARDIZATION AND 

EFFICIENT OPERATIONS. THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR, IN 
CONSULTATION WITH THE 
DEPARTMENT HEAD, SHALL 
OBTAIN A FORMAL PROPOSAL 
FROM THE VENDOR SPECIFIC TO 
THE NEEDED GOODS AND 
SERVICES, AND SHALL MAKE ALL 
GOOD FAITH EFFORTS TO 
SECURE A PRICE THAT IS IN THE 
BEST INTERESTS OF THE CITY. 
THE REQUESTING DEPARTMENT 
SHALL PRODUCE A WRITTEN 
EVALUATION OF THE PROPOSED 
SOLE SOURCE PURCHASE, 
DETAILING THE RATIONALE FOR 
THE RECOMMENDATION. 

(3) THE PURCHASE 
FOLLOWS THE REQUIREMENTS 
FOR APPROVAL THRESHOLDS 


15 



OF § 18-21.3 COMPETITIVE 
SEALED BIDDING - SECTION (8) 
AND § 18-21.4 COMPETITIVE 

SEALED PROPOSALS - SECTION 

( 9 ). 

§ 18-21.9 EMERGENCY PURCHASES. 

NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER 
PROVISION OF THESE REGULATIONS, 
THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR MAY 
MAKE OR AUTHORIZE OTHERS TO 
MAKE EMERGENCY PURCHASES OF 
SUPPLIES, SERVICES, OR 

CONSTRUCTION ITEMS WHEN THERE 
EXISTS A THREAT TO PUBLIC HEALTH, 
WELFARE, OR SAFETY; PROVIDED 
THAT THE EMERGENCY 

PROCUREMENTS SHALL BE MADE 
WITH SUCH COMPETITION AS IS 
PRACTICABLE UNDER THE 

CIRCUMSTANCES. THE REQUESTING 
DEPARTMENT SHALL PRODUCE A 
WRITTEN RATIONALE OF THE 
CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING THE 
NEED FOR AN EMERGENCY PURCHASE, 
THE COST, AND ANY EFFORTS MADE TO 
SECURE COMPETITIVE PRICES. 

IF THE AUTHORIZED PURCHASE 
IS FOR LESS THAN $20,000, THE 
DECISION OF THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR SHALL BE FINAL, AND A 
NOTATION WILL BE MADE IN THE 
ELECTRONIC RECORD KEEPING FOR 
THE PURCHASE REQUEST. IF TIME 
PERMITS, THE PURCHASE SHOULD 
FOLLOW THE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
APPROVAL THRESHOLDS OF § 18-21.3 
COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDDING - 
SECTION (8) AND § 18-21.4 COMPETITIVE 
SEALED PROPOSALS - SECTION (9). 

§ 18-21,10 REPORTING AND 

ACCOUNTABILITY. 

THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR, ON 
A MONTHLY BASIS, SHALL PREPARE A 
REPORT THAT PROVIDES TOTAL 


EXPENDITURES WITH SPECIFIC 
VENDORS TO DATE THAT HAVE 
EXCEEDED A TOTAL OF $10,000.00. THIS 
REPORT SHALL INCLUDE THE 
PURCHASE ORDER NUMBER, THE 
AMOUNT OF THE PURCHASE, THE 
DEPARTMENT REQUESTING THE 
GOODS AND SERVICES, AND A 
DESCRIPTION OF THE GOODS AND 
SERVICES. 

THE REPORT SHALL BE MADE 
PUBLICALLY AVAILABLE VIA 
ELECTRONIC MEANS ON A MONTHLY 
BASIS. THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR 
SHALL BE AVAILABLE TO REVIEW THE 
REPORT AND PROVIDE ADDITIONAL 
INFORMATION AS MAY BE REQUESTED 
BY THE CITY COUNCIL, OR THEIR 
DESIGNATED COMMITTEE. 

§ 18-21.11 CONTRACTS. 

WHERE FINAL AGREEMENT FOR 
THE PURCHASE OF GOODS OR 
SERVICES REQUIRES A CONTRACT 
BINDING THE CITY, OTHER THAN THE 
ISSUANCE OF A PURCHASE ORDER OR 
USE OF A PROCUREMENT CARD, THE 
AGREEMENT MUST BE APPROVED BY 
THE CITY ATTORNEY BEFORE 
PRESENTING IT TO THE PERSON 
AUTHORIZED TO BIND THE CITY. 

A MODIFICATION OF A 
CONTRACT MUST BE APPROVED IN THE 
SAME MANNER THAT THE CONTRACT 
WAS APPROVED. ALL CONTRACT 
MODIFICATIONS MUST BE IN WRITING 
AND APPROVED IN ADVANCE BY THE 
CITY ATTORNEY. 

DEPARTMENT HEADS ARE 
RESPONSIBLE FOR MONITORING THE 
TERMS OF ANY AGREEMENT 
APPROVED FOR GOODS AND SERVICES 
FOR THEIR AREA OF RESPONSIBILITY. 
THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR AND 
DEPARTMENT HEADS SHALL ASSURE 
16 



THAT A CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION 
SYSTEM IS DESIGNED AND 
IMPLEMENTED TO ENSURE THAT A 
CONTRACTOR IS PERFORMING IN 
ACCORDANCE WITH THE 

SOLICITATION UNDER WHICH THE 
CONTRACT WAS AWARDED AND THE 
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE 
CONTRACT, AND THAT THE 
DEPARTMENT IS IN COMPLIANCE WITH 
ALL REQUIREMENTS OF ANY 
APPLICABLE GRANTS. 

§ 18-21.12 DUE DILIGENCE. 

AS PART OF THE EVALUATION OF 
ANY VENDOR PROPOSING TO DO 
BUSINESS WITH THE CITY, THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR OR DESIGNEE 
MAY, AT REASONABLE TIMES, INSPECT 
THE PART OF THE PLANT, PLACE OF 
BUSINESS, OR WORKSITE OF A 
CONTRACTOR OR SUBCONTRACTOR 
AT ANY TIER THAT IS PERTINENT TO 
THE PERFORMANCE OF ANY 
CONTRACT AWARDED, OR TO BE 
AWARDED, BY THE CITY. 

THE CITY MAY ALSO, AT 
REASONABLE TIMES AND PLACES, 
AUDIT THE BOOKS AND RECORDS OF 
ANY CONTRACTOR WHO HAS 
SUBMITTED COST OR PRICING DATA AS 
A PART OF ITS BID OR PROPOSAL, TO 
THE EXTENT THAT THE BOOKS, 
DOCUMENTS, PAPER, AND RECORDS 
ARE PERTINENT TO THE COST OR 
PRICING DATA FOR THREE (3) YEARS 
FROM THE DATE OF FINAL PAYMENT 
UNDER THE CONTRACT. 

§ 18-21.13 REPORTING OF 

ANTICOMPETITIVE PRACTICES. 

WHEN FOR ANY REASON 
COLLUSION OR OTHER 

ANTICOMPETITIVE PRACTICES ARE 
SUSPECTED AMONG ANY BIDDERS OR 
RESPONDENTS, A NOTICE OF THE 


RELEVANT FACTS SHALL BE 
TRANSMITTED TO THE CITY 
ATTORNEY’S OFFICE. 

§ 18-21.14 DEBARMENT OR SUSPENSION. 

THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR, 
WITH THE CONSENT OF THE CITY 
ATTORNEY AND THE APPROVAL OF 
THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL, IS 
AUTHORIZED TO DEBAR A PERSON FOR 
CAUSE FROM CONSIDERATION FOR 
AWARD OF CONTRACTS. THE 
DEBARMENT SHALL BE FOR A PERIOD 
OF NOT MORE THAN THREE (3) YEARS. 
AFTER CONSULTATION WITH THE CITY 
ATTORNEY, THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR IS AUTHORIZED TO 
SUSPEND A PERSON FROM 
CONSIDERATION FOR AWARD OF 
CONTRACTS IF THERE IS PROBABLE 
CAUSE TO BELIEVE THAT THE PERSON 
HAS ENGAGED IN ANY ACTIVITY THAT 
MIGHT LEAD TO DEBARMENT. THE 
SUSPENSION SHALL BE FOR A PERIOD 
NOT TO EXCEED THREE (3) YEARS. THE 
CAUSES FOR DEBARMENT INCLUDE: 

(1) CONVICTION FOR 

COMMISSION OF A CRIMINAL 
OFFENSE AS AN INCIDENT TO 
OBTAINING OR ATTEMPTING TO 
OBTAIN A PUBLIC OR PRIVATE 
CONTRACT OR SUBCONTRACT, 
OR IN THE PERFORMANCE OF 
THE CONTRACT OR 

SUBCONTRACT; 

(2) CONVICTION UNDER 

STATE OR FEDERAL STATUTES 
OF EMBEZZLEMENT, THEFT, 
FORGERY, BRIBERY, 

FALSIFICATION OR 

DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS, 
RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY, 
OR ANY OTHER OFFENSE 
INDICATING A LACK OF 
BUSINESS INTEGRITY OR 
BUSINESS HONESTY THAT 


17 



CURRENTLY, SERIOUSLY, AND 
DIRECTLY AFFECTS 

RESPONSIBILITY AS A CITY 
CONTRACTOR; 

(3) CONVICTION UNDER 
STATE OR FEDERAL ANTITRUST 
STATUTES ARISING OUT OF THE 
SUBMISSION OF BIDS OR 
PROPOSALS; 

(4) VIOLATION OF 

CONTRACT PROVISIONS, AS SET 
FORTH BELOW, OF A 
CHARACTER THAT IS REGARDED 
BY THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR 
TO BE SO SERIOUS AS TO JUSTIFY 
DEBARMENT ACTION: 

(A) DELIBERATE 

FAILURE, WITHOUT GOOD 
CAUSE, TO PERFORM IN 
ACCORDANCE WITH THE 
SPECIFICATIONS OR 

WITHIN THE TIME LIMIT 
PROVIDED IN THE 
CONTRACT; OR 

(B) A RECENT 

RECORD OF FAILURE TO 
PERFORM, OR OF 
UNSATISFACTORY 
PERFORMANCE, IN 

ACCORDANCE WITH THE 
TERMS OF ONE OR MORE 
CONTRACTS; PROVIDED 
THAT FAILURE TO 
PERFORM OR 

UNSATISFACTORY 
PERFORMANCE CAUSED BY 
ACTS BEYOND THE 
CONTROL OF THE 
CONTRACTOR SHALL NOT 
BE CONSIDERED TO BE A 
BASIS FOR DEBARMENT; 

(5) ANY OTHER CAUSE 
THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR 
DETERMINES TO BE SO SERIOUS 


AND COMPELLING AS TO AFFECT 
RESPONSIBILITY AS A CITY 
CONTRACTOR, INCLUDING 

DEBARMENT BY ANOTHER 
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY FOR 
ANY CAUSE LISTED IN THESE 
REGULATIONS; AND 

(6) FOR VIOLATION OF 
THE ETHICAL STANDARDS AS SET 
FORTH IN THE CITY OF FLINT 
CODE OF CONDUCT POLICY. 

THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR 
SHALL ISSUE A WRITTEN DECISION TO 
DEBAR OR SUSPEND. THE DECISION 
SHALL STATE THE REASONS FOR THE 
ACTION TAKEN AND INFORM THE 
DEBARRED OR SUSPENDED PERSON 
INVOLVED OF THEIR RIGHTS 
CONCERNING JUDICIAL OR 
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW. ANY 
PERSON RECOMMENDED TO BE 
DEBARRED PURSUANT TO THIS 
SECTION SHALL BE GIVEN ADVANCE 
WRITTEN NOTICE AND SHALL BE 
AFFORDED THE RIGHT TO CONTEST 
THE RECOMMENDATION BEFORE THE 
CITY COUNCIL. 

§ 18-21.15 BID PROTESTS. 

(1) RIGHT TO PROTEST. ANY 
ACTUAL OR PROSPECTIVE BIDDER, 
RESPONDENT, OR CONTRACTOR WHO 
IS AGGRIEVED IN CONNECTION WITH 
THE SOLICITATION OR AWARD OF A 
PURCHASE ORDER AGREEMENT OR 
CONTRACT MAY PROTEST THE ACTION 
TO THE CITY. 

(2) PROCESS FOR FILING A 

PROTEST. A PROTEST WITH RESPECT 
TO AN INVITATION FOR BIDS OR 
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS MUST BE 
SUBMITTED IN WRITING TO THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR. THE 

PROTEST MUST BE ENTITLED “BID 
PROTEST” AND MUST CLEARLY 

18 



IDENTIFY THE SOLICITATION AND 
AWARD UNDER PROTEST, AND MUST 
STATE THE GROUNDS FOR THE 
PROTEST. THE PURCHASING 

DIRECTOR SHALL PROVIDE A COPY OF 
ANY TIMELY BID PROTEST TO THE 
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL WITHIN 
SEVEN (7) CALENDAR DAYS OF ITS 
SUBMISSION. 

(3) TIME LIMITS FOR FILING. 
PROTESTS MUST BE RECEIVED BY THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR NO LATER 
THAN SEVEN (7) CALENDAR DAYS 
AFTER THE AGGRIEVED PERSON KNEW 
OR SHOULD HAVE KNOWN OF THE 
FACTS GIVING RISE TO THE PROTEST, 
AND IN NO EVENT LATER THAN 
FOURTEEN (14) CALENDAR DAYS AFTER 
AWARD OF THE PURCHASE ORDER 
AGREEMENT OR CONTRACT. FAILURE 
TO FILE A BID PROTEST WITHIN THESE 
TIME LIMITS CONSTITUTES A WAIVER 
OF THE PROTEST. 

(4) STAY OF PROCUREMENTS 

DURING PROTESTS '. IN THE EVENT A 
TIMELY PROTEST IS SUBMITTED TO 
THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR UNDER 
THIS SECTION, THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR SHALL NOT PROCEED 
FURTHER WITH THE SOLICITATION, 
AWARD, OR PERFORMANCE OF THE 
PURCHASE ORDER AGREEMENT OR 
CONTRACT UNTIL THE PROTEST IS 
SUSTAINED OR DISMISSED, OR THE 
CITY COUNCIL MAKES A 
DETERMINATION ON THE RECORD 
THAT THE AWARD OR PERFORMANCE 
OF A PURCHASE ORDER AGREEMENT 
OR CONTRACT WITHOUT DELAY IS 
NECESSARY TO PROTECT 

SUBSTANTIAL INTERESTS OF THE CITY; 
PROVIDED HOWEVER THAT IF THE 
POSTPONEMENT OF THE PURCHASE OF 
GOODS OR SERVICES IMPAIRS THE 
ABILITY OF THE CITY TO CARRY OUT 
ITS SERVICES, THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR, WITH THE APPROVAL OF 


THE MAYOR, MAY TAKE NECESSARY 
STEPS TO OBTAIN THE MINIMUM 
AMOUNT OF GOODS AND SERVICES 
NECESSARY TO ENABLE CITY 
SERVICES TO CONTINUE. 

(5) DECISION BY THE 

PURCHASING DIRECTOR . THE 

PURCHASING DIRECTOR SHALL ISSUE 
A WRITTEN DECISION SUSTAINING OR 
DENYING THE BID PROTEST WITHIN 
FIFTEEN (15) DAYS OF RECEIPT OF A 
WRITTEN AND TIMELY PROTEST. A 
COPY OF THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR’S DECISION MUST BE 
PROVIDED TO THE PROTESTING 
BIDDER OR PROPOSER, THE MAYOR, 
AND THE CITY COUNCIL. 

(6) APPEAL TO THE MAYOR. A 
PROTESTING BIDDER OR PROPOSER 
MAY APPEAL THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR’S DECISION TO THE MAYOR 
BY FILING A WRITTEN APPEAL WITH 
THE MAYOR WITHIN SEVEN (7) DAYS OF 
THE DATE OF THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR’S DECISION. THE MAYOR 
SHALL CONDUCT THE INVESTIGATION 
AS DEEMED NECESSARY TO RESPOND 
TO THE APPEAL, AND SHALL PROVIDE 
HIS OR HER DECISION ON THE APPEAL 
WITHIN SEVEN (7) DAYS. 

(7) APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL. 
A PROTESTING BIDDER OR PROPOSER 
MAY APPEAL THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR’S DECISION TO THE CITY 
COUNCIL BY FILING A WRITTEN 
APPEAL WITH THE CITY CLERK 
WITHIN SEVEN (7) DAYS OF THE DATE 
OF THE MAYOR’S DECISION. THE 
PROTESTING BIDDER SHALL BE 
AFFORDED AN OPPORTUNITY AT THE 
NEXT REGULARLY SCHEDULED CITY 
COUNCIL MEETING TO ADDRESS THE 
CITY COUNCIL AND STATE THE 
GROUNDS FOR THE APPEAL. NO LATER 
THAN THE NEXT REGULARLY 
SCHEDULED MEETING, CITY COUNCIL 

19 



SHALL MAKE ITS DECISION ON THE 
APPEAL. 

§ 18-21.16 CONTRACT CLAIMS. 

(1) DECISION OF THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR. ALL CLAIMS 
BY A CONTRACTOR AGAINST THE CITY 
RELATING TO A CONTRACT SHALL BE 
SUBMITTED IN WRITING TO THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR FOR A 
DECISION. THE SUBMISSION MUST 
IDENTIFY THE GROUNDS FOR THE 
CLAIM. THE CONTRACTOR MAY 
REQUEST A CONFERENCE WITH THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR ON THE 
CLAIM. CLAIMS INCLUDE, WITHOUT 
LIMITATION, DISPUTES ARISING 
UNDER A CONTRACT, AND THOSE 
BASED UPON BREACH OF CONTRACT, 
MISTAKE, MISREPRESENTATION, OR 
OTHER CAUSE FOR CONTRACT 
MODIFICATION OR RESCISSION. 

(2) NOTICE TO THE 

CONTRACTOR OF THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR’S DECISION. THE DECISION 
OF THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR SHALL 
BE ISSUED IN WRITING WITHIN THIRTY 
(30) DAYS OF SUBMISSION, AND SHALL 
BE IMMEDIATELY MAILED OR 
OTHERWISE FURNISHED TO THE 
CONTRACTOR. THE DECISION SHALL 
STATE THE REASONS FOR THE 
DECISION REACHED, AND SHALL 
INFORM THE CONTRACTOR OF ITS 
APPEAL RIGHTS UNDER SUBSECTION 

(3) OF THIS SECTION. THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR SHALL CONSULT WITH THE 
CITY ATTORNEY PRIOR TO MAKING A 
DECISION DENYING THE 

CONTRACTOR’S CLAIM IN WHOLE OR 
IN PART. 

(3) FINALITY OF PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR DECISION; CONTRACTOR’S 
RIGHT TO APPEAL. THE PURCHASING 
DIRECTOR DECISION SHALL BE FINAL 
AND CONCLUSIVE UNLESS, WITHIN 


SEVEN (7) CALENDAR DAYS FROM THE 
DATE OF RECEIPT OF THE DECISION, 
THE CONTRACTOR MAILS OR 
OTHERWISE DELIVERS A WRITTEN 
APPEAL TO THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR. 

(4) APPEAL TO THE CITY 
ADMINISTRATOR. A PROTESTING 
CONTRACTOR MAY APPEAL THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR’S DECISION 
TO THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR BY 
FILING A WRITTEN APPEAL WITH THE 
CITY ADMINISTRATOR WITHIN SEVEN 
(7) DAYS OF THE DATE OF THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR’S DECISION. 
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR SHALL 
CONDUCT THE INVESTIGATION AS 
DEEMED NECESSARY TO RESPOND TO 
THE APPEAL, AND SHALL PROVIDE HIS 
DECISION ON THE APPEAL WITHIN 
SEVEN (7) DAYS. 

§ 18-21.17 AUTHORITY OF THE 

PURCHASING DIRECTOR TO SETTLE 
BID PROTESTS AND CONTRACT 
CLAIMS. 

THE PURCHASING DIRECTOR IS 
AUTHORIZED TO SETTLE ANY PROTEST 
REGARDING THE SOLICITATION OR 
AWARD OF A PURCHASE ORDER 
AGREEMENT OR CITY CONTRACT, OR 
ANY CLAIM ARISING OUT OF THE 
PERFORMANCE OF A PURCHASE 
ORDER AGREEMENT OR CITY 
CONTRACT, PRIOR TO THE 
COMMENCEMENT OF AN ACTION IN A 
COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION. 

§ 18-21.18 CANCELLATION OF 
SOLICITATIONS FOR THE PURCHASE 
OF GOODS AND SERVICES. 

AT ANY TIME THE CITY 
DETERMINES THAT A SOLICITATION 
FOR GOODS OR SERVICES SHOULD BE 
CANCELLED BECAUSE IT IS NOT IN THE 
BEST INTERESTS OF THE CITY TO 
MAKE THE PROCUREMENT, THE 
20 



PURCHASING DIRECTOR SHALL 
IMMEDIATELY NOTIFY THE 
POTENTIAL VENDORS OF THE CITY’S 
DECISION. HOWEVER, THE CITY SHALL 
HAVE NO OBLIGATION OR 
RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY COSTS OR 
INCONVENIENCES INCURRED BY ANY 
POTENTIAL VENDOR, UNLESS AN 
AWARD HAS BEEN FORMALLY MADE 
AND ACCEPTED BY ISSUANCE OF A 
PURCHASE ORDER OR SIGNING OF A 
CONTRACT. 

§ 18-21.19 ETHICS IN PURCHASING. 

THE PROCESS OF PURCHASING 
GOODS AND SERVICES IS DESIGNED TO 
ENSURE COMPETITIVE PROCUREMENT 
CONDUCTED IN AN ETHICAL AND 
TIMELY MANNER IN ORDER FOR THE 
CITY TO CARRY OUT ITS DUTIES. 

ALL EMPLOYEES DELEGATED 
AUTHORITY WITH RESPECT TO ALL 
PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES 
ARE CHARGED WITH THE 
RESPONSIBILITY OF MAKING 
PURCHASES IN A COMPETITIVE AND 
ETHICAL MANNER, AND FOR 
ADHERING IN ALL RESPECTS TO THE 
CITY OF FLINT CODE OF CONDUCT 
POLICY. VIOLATION OF THE CITY OF 
FLINT CODE OF CONDUCT POLICY, 
INCLUDING THE USE OF CITY 
RESOURCES FOR PERSONAL USE OR 
GAIN IS GROUNDS FOR TERMINATION 
OF EMPLOYMENT AND POSSIBLE 
CRIMINAL PROSECUTION. 

LIKEWISE, PERSONS OR ENTITIES 
PROPOSING TO, OR ENGAGED IN, THE 
PROVISION OF GOODS AND SERVICES 
TO THE CITY ARE CHARGED WITH THE 
RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPOSING AND 
PROVIDING GOODS AND SERVICES IN A 
COMPETITIVE AND ETHICAL MANNER. 

WHILE A PROCUREMENT IS 
PENDING, BIDDERS AND PROPOSERS 


SHALL NOT COMMUNICATE ABOUT 
THE SOLICITATION WITH ANY CITY 
EMPLOYEE, AGENT, OR ELECTED 
OFFICIAL, OTHER THAN THE 
PURCHASING DIRECTOR OR OTHER 
CITY PERSONNEL IDENTIFIED IN THE 
SOLICITATION. 

TO THE EXTENT THAT 
VIOLATIONS OF THE ETHICAL 
STANDARDS OF CONDUCT SET FORTH 
IN THIS ARTICLE CONSTITUTE 
VIOLATIONS OF THE MICHIGAN PENAL 
CODE, THEY SHALL BE PUNISHABLE AS 
PROVIDED THEREIN. THE PENALTIES 
SHALL BE IN ADDITION TO THE CIVIL 
SANCTIONS SET FORTH IN THIS 
ARTICLE. CRIMINAL, CIVIL, AND 
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS AGAINST 
EMPLOYEES OR NON-EMPLOYEES 
THAT ARE IN EXISTENCE ON THE 
EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS ARTICLE 
SHALL NOT BE IMPAIRED. 

IT SHALL BE UNETHICAL AND 
GROUNDS FOR DEBARMENT AND 
POTENTIAL CRIMINAL PROSECUTION 
FOR ANY PERSON TO OFFER, GIVE, OR 
AGREE TO GIVE TO ANY CITY 
EMPLOYEE A GRATUITY, AN OFFER OF 
EMPLOYMENT, OR ANYTHING ELSE OF 
VALUE IN CONNECTION WITH ANY 
DECISION TO APPROVE, DISAPPROVE, 
OR RECOMMEND THE AWARD OF A 
CONTRACT, OR IN CONNECTION WITH 
ANY DECISION WITH REGARD TO A BID 
PROTEST, OR WITH INTENT TO 
INFLUENCE THE CONTENT OF ANY 
SPECIFICATIONS OR PROCUREMENT 
STANDARDS, OR ADVICE, 

INVESTIGATION, AUDIT REPORT, OR 
ANY OTHER ADVISORY 

COMMUNICATION RELATED TO A 
PROCUREMENT OR CONTRACT UNDER 
THIS ARTICLE. 

IT SHALL BE UNETHICAL AND A 
VIOLATION OF THE CITY OF FLINT 
CODE OF CONDUCT POLICY AND 
21 



GROUNDS FOR; POSSIBLE 

TERMINATION ..AND CRIMINAL 
'PROSECUTION FOR ANY CITY 
EMPLOYEE TO SOLICIT,: DEMAND, 
ACCEPT, OS AGREE TO ACCEPT FROM; 
ANOTHER: PERSON A GRATUITY, AN 

OFFER Of Employment,. OR 

ANYTHING ELSE OF VALUE IN 
CONNECTION WITH ANY DECISION TO 
APPROVE, DISAPPROVE, OR 
RECOMMEND THE AWARD OF A 
CONTRACT, OR IN CONNECTION WITH 
ANY DECISION WITH REGARD TO A BID 
PROTEST, OR WITH INTENT TO 
INFLUENCE THE CONTENT OF ANY 
SPECIFICATIONS OR PROCUREMENT 
STANDARDS, OR ADVICE, 

INVESTIGATION, AUDIT REPORT, OR 
ANY OTHER ADVISORY 

COMMUNICATION RELATED TO A 
PROCUREMENT OR CONTRACT UNDER 


A 

$ .-i 

■.AOTj- •*. 

L- 


. s; 

Adopted IfetS ; / A"" 


2(115 AJL 


A" A 


/.V' 


.4: . , • ; 4yS;. >! N . 


Glraid Ambrose, Emergency Manager 



MOrciSn'Afic&Bib^Pu«tmn«g (>r<Ss jiiee :Fi A2> 3 S,no<'.s 


IT SHALL RE UNETHICAL AND 
GROUNDS; FOR; DEBARMENT AND 
POTENTIAL: CRIMINAL PROSECUTION 
FOR; ANY PAYMENT, GRATUITY, OR 
OFFER OF EMPLOYMENT TO BE MADE 
BY OR ON BEHALF OF A 
SUBCQNT!P.CTOR1jNDER A CONTRACT 
TO THE PRIME: CONTRACTOR OR 
HIGHER TIER SUBCONTRACTOR OR 
ANY PERSON ASSOCIATED 
THEREWITH, AS AN INDUCEMENT FOR 
THE: AWARD OF A. SUBCONTRACT- OR 

Order, 


| UL2L-44 18-21.20 SALE OR LEASE: OF 
CITY OWNED 


Nd interest in real property of the City &f 
Fli-nt shall be disposed of, transferred, or 
otherwise alienated unless by prdinafle© or 
resolution of the City Council. 


See, 2. 


effeefive . 


TIBs ordinance shall fenyame 
/#"*' day of 





Flint, Michigan ~ April 13, 2015 - By letter to City Councii issued today, Emergency 
Manager Jerry Ambrose congratulated City Councii for tilsi r recent actions committing to 
restoring and maintaining the City's financial solvency. Mr. Ambrose stated that recent 
actions to adopt a series of ordinances requiring commitment to establishing appropriate 
financial reserves and an: improved planning and budgeting process indicate that the 
Councii understands the need to restore and maintain Flint’s financial solvency. “While 
there is much yet to do, these are positive steps in the right direction/' said Mr. Ambrose. 
"The ongoing; challenge wilf be to adhere to the requirements the City Council has adopted 
themselves.” 

Mr. Ambrose’s letter also reiterated the priority issues currently facing the City — 
developing a long range financial plan, beginning with the upcoming FY16 and FY1? 
budget: continuing to address concerns with water safety, quality and affordability; and 
Stabilizing; resources for public safety. ‘These are clearly the top priority issues, and ones 
which require the cooperation of aft if they are to be successfully addressed /’ stated Mn 
Ambrose.; ■‘Unfortunately, resources are extremely limited, and we must make decisions 
which address the most critical issues in a financiaiiy sound manner ~ and that often 
means we cannot do everything everybody wants:' 

Some of the ingredients of restoring Flint’s financial solvency on a sustainable basis, 

according to Mr. Ambrose, inofude obtaining a $7 million loan to finance the accumulated 
-CCNTfNUE^ 

City Hal! 

1101, S. Saginaw Street - Flint. Michigan 48502 
8KV766-7346 FAX; R10-7fVV-7218 www . dtvoffli nl.coni 




General Fuad deficit and approving the consolidation of the 87th and 68th District Courts, 
Both issues: are pending before City Council and Mr. Ambrose is hopeful; for a quick 
positive response. "The terms and conditions offered with this loan equate to a good deal 
for the City and will enable it to begin to more quickly rebuild its financial solvency. 
Approving the co u rt consoi idatio n will reduce City expenses by $8.4 million over the next 
1 0 years and will help to provide some stability in funding other public safety services.” 

Mr. Ambrose also presented Council with actions he is taking to continue the progress 
towards transition, including an updated purchasing ordinance and an order officially 
defining the role of the new City Administrator as the chief administrative: officer for the 
City. '‘Moving the City forward in today’s environment requires professional managers, 
clear responsibilities, and modern practices;’ said Ambrose. “These actions move In that 
direction, and hopefully move the Council forward In truly becoming the governing body 
of the City, focused on policies and accountability for moving the City forward based on 
its vision, mission, and goals.” 

Recognizing the increasing rote: of the Mayor and Council as the City transitions to home 
rule with oversight by a Receivership Transition Advisory Board, Mr. Ambrose announced 
that he Is reestablishing the saiaries for Mayor and Council at the teveis in place before 
the City was most recently placed into state receivership He noted that Council meetings 
are now held twice per month, with committee meetings held once per month, and the 
Mayor is now much more engaged in a Chief Executive role. Continued receipt: of the re- 
established salaries, however, will be contingent upon attainment of certain training 
levels. These training levels were established in prior orders of the Emergency Manager, 
and Couhciinlembers will have until November 1, 2015 to obtain it. or their salary will be 
reduced to the current level 


mm 

Xitel S. Saginyw Stows - Hint. Michigan 48502 
S 10-766W346 KA.X: 8U)-?66-72}8 www.ciW affltnt.aw> 






From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


USE THIS VERSION for proofing 


Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Wednesday, April 29, 2015 12:14 PM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

20150429_Flint Emergency Management and Water Briefing. docx 
20150429_Flint Emergency Management and Water Briefing.docx 


l 



Flint Emergency Management Briefin 


Redacted 




Redacted 


Flint Water Briefing 

In November 2012 the Department of Treasury commissioned the firm of Tucker, Young, Jackson & Tull, 
Inc. (TYJT) to analyze options for the City of Flint to either remain a customer of the Detroit Water & 
Sewer Department (DWSD) or to join the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) in Genesee County. The 
purpose of this study was to provide objective analyses to the State Treasurer and Flint's Emergency 
Financial Manager (EFM) in order to secure future potable drinking water for the City. 

In December 2012, staff from TYJT met with representatives from the Department of Treasury and the 
City of Flint to provide a preliminary report on their findings. At this meeting, options presented were: 

1) Flint Water Plant will provide 100% water, 2) 100% provision of untreated Lake Huron Water by KWA, 
3) 100% provision of treated drinking water by DWSD, or 4) provision of variable amounts of water from 
DWSD using a combination of blended DWSD water and Flint River water. 

The Flint EFM eliminated all options except the 100% DWSD option or joining KWA, deciding later to join 
KWA. 

On April 25, Flint officially ended nearly 50-years of using DWSD to supply water. 

The city currently uses the Flint River until the Karegnondi Water Authority pipeline is built, which will 
bring untreated Lake Huron water to Genesee County. KWA should be operational by winter 2016. 

The Flint River water is harder than DWSD. A number of residents are experiencing discoloration and 
order with the water. In addition there have been a number of citations largely around heighten levels 
of Total Trihalomethanes (TTHM). 


Given water quality concerns, suggestions have been made that the City of Flint should return to using 
water purchased through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (DWSD). For many reasons, 
financial and otherwise, the City of Flint can ill-afford to switch courses at this point. The estimated cost 
to go back to the water provided by the DWSD is approximately $1 million per month and the City 
expects to be using the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) Lake Huron water within or before the 1 st 
quarter of 2016. 




The City of Flint is proceeding with a series of actions to ensure the continued safety of Flint drinking 
water is maintained and that issues of discoloration and odor continue to be addressed. Most notably, 
the installation of a Granulated Active Charcoal filter (GAC) at the Water Treatment Plant is expected to 
be authorized this week by Emergency Manager Jerry Ambrose. 

The introduction of the GAC to the treatment process at Flint's plant will absorb or reduce the chemical 
precursors which will block or eliminate the formation of TTHM during the filtration process. 

Engineering and design are underway and installation of the GAC is targeted for completion by mid-July. 
Cost of this improvement is projected at $1.5 million and will be paid for by the proceeds from the state 
approved restructuring of the City's Drinking Water Revolving Fund loans. 

In addition to the installation of the GAC, the City of Flint is undertaking a number of other 
improvements to the water system in the coming months, including a water leak detection monitoring, 
completion of the hydraulic model and subsequent targeted hydrant flushing program, and the 
replacement of two miles of water main pipe in a critical area of the city. All of these improvements 
scheduled to occur within the next six months. 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Wednesday, July 29, 2015 9:03 AM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

FW: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Memo on Water Coalition Questions III.07-29-15.docx; Flint Water Rate History FINAL 
02.11.15.pdf 


Importance: 


High 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 9:03:27 AM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada) 

To: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: FW: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Here's the answers to some of the questions. How do you want to approach the pastors and community leaders, we 
owe them answers to the questions they asked. 


From: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 8:36 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Subject: FW: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 
Importance: High 

AH, Attached is a memo and water rate summary answering several of the questions raised by the Flint pastors. Please 
iet me know if you have any questions. Wayne 

Wayne L. Workman 
Deputy State Treasurer 
Michigan Department of Treasury 


From: Cline, Richard (Treasury) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 8:21 AM 
To: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Cc: Dempkowski, Angela (Treasury); Byrne, Randall (Treasury) 

Subject: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Importance: High 

Wayne, 

Attached is the water rate table you asked for and I have updated the memo to reference this as an attachment. 

If you need anything else, please let me know. 

Note that Rob, Randy and I will be in Benton Harbor for a portion of today conducting their annual RTAB evaluation. 


l 




Eric Cline j Department Manager 

State of Michigan, j Michigan Department of Treasury | Office of Fiscal Responsibility 
430 W. Allegan Street, 3rd Floor j Lansing. MI 48922 

Lansing Office (517) 333-2078 j Traverse City Office (231) 322-3228 

E-mail clinerl^niicMgan,gpy 


CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: This e-mas!, and any attachments, is for the sole use of the intended recipients) and may contain 
information that is confidential and protected from disclosure under the law. Any unauthorized review, use, disclosure, or distrihuti 
ss prohibited. If you are not the intended recipient, piease contact the sender by reply e-mail, and delete/destroy ail copies of the 


original message and attachments Thank you. 


2 


NICK A. KHOURI 
STATE TREASURER 

TO: Randall Byrne, State Administrative Manager; Office of Fiscal Responsibility 

FROM: Eric Cline, Department Manager; Office of Fiscal Responsibility 

SUBJECT : Questions Regarding City of Flint Water System 

DATE: July 28, 2015 


RICK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 


State of Michigan 

DEPARTMENT OF TREASURY 

Lansing 


At a July 23, 2015 meeting, Deputy Treasurer Workman posed several questions regarding the City of 
Flint’s water system. This memo is a response to those questions. 

The annual cost to the City of Flint to reconnect to the DWSD system 

In a March 3, 2015 memo to Deputy Treasurer Workman, Emergency Manager Ambrose noted that he 
had been informed by DWSD that such a reconnection would immediately levy a fixed cost on the City of 
$10. 1 -million per year. 

Actual water purchases would be in addition to the fixed cost fee and would be dependent upon actual 
usage, but the annual cost was estimated to be as high as $1 -million/month; making the entire total of a 
one year connection back to DWSD as high as $22-million. This cost would be reduced to approximately 
$ 19-million/year once the City’s $3-million annual expense of operating the water system itself was 
offset. 

These calculations were outlined in a March 2015 memo from the Emergency Manager to Deputy 
Treasurer Workman and update cost projections provided in a February 1 1, 2015 memo to Chief Deputy 
Treasurer Tom Saxton. 

The Emergency Manager also stated his concern that for the City to be able to pay these costs that water 
rates charged to Flint residents would need to be increased by a minimum of 30%. Water rate increases 
between 2010 and 2015 are illustrated in the table attached. 

In addition, DWSD was requiring that the City of Flint negotiate a 30-year contract for the provision of 
back-up services. 

The City of Flint’s degree of participation in the management of the KWA system 

Mayor Dayne Walling is the City's official representative to the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA). 

The participation of the Mayor as the official representative for the City of Flint is established in the 
KWA Articles of Incorporation. Mayor Walling is the current Chair of the Board of the KWA Board of 
Directors. 

Continued use of Flint River water after the City is connected to the KWA system 


P.O. BOX 30716 • LANSING, MICHIGAN 48909 
www.michigan.gov/treasury • (517) 373-3200 




Page 2 


The City Administrator has confirmed that once the City is fully connected to the KWA system they will 
no longer continue to use Flint River water. 

The Flint River, however, will be the City’s primary back-up water source in the event that a major 
disruption in the KWA system temporarily prevents the City from receiving water. 

The process used to hire Veolia 

Veolia responded on January 29, 2015, to a Request for Proposal issued by the City of Flint. Emergency 
Manager Ambrose made the final decision to retain Veolia. 

The importance of hydrant flushing 

Fire hydrant flushing is an important part of distribution system maintenance. It is useful in determining 
flow conditions in water mains. 

According to information from the American Water Works Association (AWWA), there are two types of 
hydrant flushing utilized. The most comprehensive method is fire-flow testing. 

Fire-flow testing requires hydrants to be opened, flushed, pressure and flow data to be collected and the 
potential fire flow at a particular point in a water main to be determined. 

Hydrant flushing pennits any debris to be cleared from a water main. They process of collecting fire flow 
data allows the determination of water pressure and flow capabilities for fighting fires at any location 
w ithin a distribution system. It can also help determine the general condition of a system by detecting 
reduced water flows in a given area. 

Status of the GAC carbon filter installation 

Six of the twelve filters will be operational by no later than the first week of August. 

Activation of the filters is expected to immediately drop the levels of TTHM within the system. 

The remaining six filters are projected to be installed and operational by the end of August. 

Status of the DuPont Street Water Main Replacement 

After an internal review, the City made the decision to rebid this project. 

There were multiple reasons for this decision, which included interference with current road projects, the 
determination that project bids were too high, and bidding timelines which were not favorable to secure 
quality bids or contractors. 

This project will be rebid by the City later this fiscal year. 

If you have any questions or need additional information on this topic, let me know. Thank you. 
Attachment 


« AUTO PATH » 



City of Flint Water Rate History 



Average Monthly 

Percentage Change 

Water Fund** 

Water Fund** 

Water Fund** 

Year (Date Effective) 

Water/Sewer Bill* 

in Water/Sewer Rates 

Total Operating Revenue 

Unrestricted Net Position 

Capital Improvements 

2010 

$64 

12% 

$31,956,754 

-$5,795,973 

$2,091,160 

1/15/2011 

$82 

29% 

$36,762,663 

-$12,443,265 

$1,403,916 

9/16/2011 

$111 

35% 




7/1/2012 

$111 

26% 

$44,854,439 

-$8,758,091 

$755,681 

2013 

$140 

0% 

$49,903,868 

$834,447 

$147,462 

07/01/13 to 06/30/14 

$140 

0% 

$43,552,152 

$760,745 

$3,301,700 

07/01/14 to 06/30/15 


6% 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 


Note* Water rate information is based on average usage of 7 units per month with a 5/8" residential remote meter. 

Note** Water fund information was compiled from the City of Flint's CAFR filed with the Michigan Department of Treasury. 
Note*** Billing breakdown contained in attached memo. 



From: 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: 

Wednesday, July 29, 2015 11:21 AM 

To: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Cc: 

Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 


If your schedule permits, let's go to Flint to meet with them next week, or we can ask them to come back to Lansing. We 
should convey the response verbally and in person. If you're open to it, I'll ask Stacie to schedule that meeting next 
week. 

Best, 

Harvey 

On Jul 29, 2015, at 9:03 AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@mich;gan.aov > wrote: 

Here's the answers to some of the questions. How do you want to approach the pastors and community 
leaders, we owe them answers to the questions they asked. 


From: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 8:36 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Subject: FW: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Importance: High 


Ail, Attached is a memo and water rate summary answering several of the questions raised by the Flint 
pastors. Please let me know if you have any questions. Wayne 


Wayne L. Workman 
Deputy State Treasurer 
Michigan Department of Treasury 


From: Cline, Richard (Treasury) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 8:21 AM 
To: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Cc: Dempkowski, Angela (Treasury); Byrne, Randall (Treasury) 

Subject: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Importance: High 

Wayne, 

Attached is the water rate table you asked for and I have updated the memo to reference this as an 
attachment. 

If you need anything else, please let me know. 


l 



Note that Rob, Randy and I will be in Benton Harbor for a portion of today conducting their annual RTAB 
evaluation. 


Eric Cline | Department Manager 

State of Michigan ] Michigan Department of Treasury j Office of Fiscal Responsibility 
430 W. Ailegan Street, 3rd Floor j Lansing, Ml 48922 

Lansing Office (51?) 335-2073 j averse City Office (231) @22-5223 

E-mail cUiieri.^micMgan.gpv 


CONF1DENTUUJ7Y NOTICE: This e-mail, and any attachments, is for the sole use of the intended recipients) and 
may contain information that is confidential and protected from disclosure under the law : Any unauthorized review, 
use, disclosure, or distribution is prohibited, if you are not the intended recipient, piease contact the sender by reply 
e-inaii, and delete/destroy ail copies of the original message and attachments Thank you. 


<Memo on Water Coalition Questions III. 07-29-1 5. docx> 
<Flint Water Rate History FINAL 02. 1 1.15.pdf> 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Wednesday, July 29, 2015 11:35 AM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

RE: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 


I don't think Dennis can go to Flint without having to completely reschedule a day and he ss out of the office August 1 0 
and then August 12 - 25 so 1 really can't completely redo a day. There’s no place to put things 


From: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 11:25 AM 
To: Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Subject: FW: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

FYI... looks like they want to go to Flint next week or have the meeting in Lansing. Please let me 
know what Dennis says and I’ll work on scheduling. 

Stacie 


From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 11:21 AM 
To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Cc: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: Re: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

If your schedule permits, let's go to Flint to meet with them next week, or we can ask them to come back to Lansing. We 
should convey the response verbally and in person. If you're open to it, I'll ask Stacie to schedule that meeting next 
week. 

Best, 

Harvey 

On Jul 29, 2015, at 9:03 AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) <muchnM wrote: 

Here's the answers to some of the questions. How do you want to approach the pastors and community 
leaders, we owe them answers to the questions they asked. 


From: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 8:36 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Subject: FW: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Importance: High 


AN, Attached is a memo and water rate summary answering several of the questions raised by the Flint 
pastors. Please let me know if you have any questions. Wayne 


Wayne L. Workman 


l 



Deputy State Treasurer 
Michigan Department of Treasury 


From: Cline, Richard (Treasury) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 8:21 AM 
To: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Cc: Dempkowski, Angela (Treasury); Byrne, Randall (Treasury) 

Subject: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Importance: High 

Wayne, 

Attached is the water rate table you asked for and I have updated the memo to reference this as an 
attachment. 

If you need anything else, please let me know. 

Note that Rob, Randy and I will be in Benton Harbor for a portion of today conducting their annual RTAB 
evaluation. 


Eric Cline j Department Manager 

State of Michigan j Michigan Department of Treasury { Office of Fiscal Responsibility 
430 W. Allegan. Sheet, 3rd Floor j Lansing, Mi 48922 

Lansing Office (517) 338-2078 j Traverse City Office (231) 922-8228 

E-mail ciiner i @ m ichig a n . go v 

CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: This e-mail, and any attachments, is for the sole use of the intended recipient (s) and 
may contain information that is confidential and protected from disclosure under the law. Any unauthorized review, 
use, disclosure, or distribution is prohibited, if you are not the intended recipient, please contact the sender by reply 
e-mail, and delete/destroy all copies of the original' message and attachments Thank you. 


<Memo on Water Coalition Questions III. 07-29-1 5. docx> 
<Flint Water Rate History FINAL 02. 1 1. 15.pdf> 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Wednesday, July 29, 2015 11:43 AM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

RE: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 


He could do an hour between 9:00 - 1 1 :Q0 or he could miss lunch and do noon - 1 :00 


From: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 11:42 AM 
To: Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Subject: RE: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Thank you. Can Dennis do Lansing on Tuesday, August 4, before 3pm? If not, I’ll see if Harvey 
wants me to schedule him to do the meeting in Flint another day without Dennis. 

Stacie 


From: Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 11:35 AM 
To: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: RE: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 


I don’t think Dennis can go to Flint without having to completely reschedule a day and he is out of the office August. 3 0 
and then August 12 - 25 so 1 really can't completely redo a day . There’s no place to put things 


From: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 11:25 AM 
To: Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Subject: FW: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

FYI... looks like they want to go to Flint next week or have the meeting in Lansing. Please let me 
know what Dennis says and I’ll work on scheduling. 

Stacie 


From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 11:21 AM 
To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Cc: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: Re: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

If your schedule permits, let's go to Flint to meet with them next week, or we can ask them to come back to Lansing. We 
should convey the response verbally and in person. If you're open to it, I'll ask Stacie to schedule that meeting next 
week. 


Best, 

Harvey 



On Jul 29, 2015, at 9:03 AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < muchmored@michfgan,gov > wrote: 


Here's the answers to some of the questions. How do you want to approach the pastors and community 
leaders, we owe them answers to the questions they asked. 


From: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 8:36 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Subject: FW: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Importance: High 


All, Attached is a memo and water rate summary answering several of the questions raised by the Flint 
pastors. Please let rne know if you have any questions. Wayne 


Wayne L. Workman 
Deputy State Treasurer 
Michigan Department of Treasury 


From: Cline, Richard (Treasury) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 8:21 AM 
To: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Cc: Dempkowski, Angela (Treasury); Byrne, Randall (Treasury) 

Subject: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Importance: High 

Wayne, 

Attached is the water rate table you asked for and I have updated the memo to reference this as an 
attachment. 

If you need anything else, please let me know. 

Note that Rob, Randy and I will be in Benton Harbor for a portion of today conducting their annual RTAB 
evaluation. 


Eric Cline | Department Manager 

State of Michigan j Michigan Department of Treasury j Office of Fiscal Responsibility 
430 W. Ailegan Street, 3rd Floor \ Lansing, Ml 48922 

Lansing Office (517) 335-2078 j Traverse City Office (231) 922-5228 

E-mail diner i @michiga n,gov 

CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: This e-mail, and any attachments, is for the sole use of the intended recipients) and 
may contain information that is confidential and protected from disclosure under the law. Any unauthorized review, 
use, disclosure, or distribution is prohibited, if you are not. the intended recipient, please contact the sender by reply 
e-mail , and delete/destroy all copies of the anginal message and attachments Thank you. 


<Memo on Water Coalition Questions III. 07-29-1 5. docx> 
<Flint Water Rate History FINAL 02. 1 1. 15.pdf> 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Best, 

Harvey 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Hollins, Harvey (GOV)" < holl i n sh@mi eh i gan go v > 

Dat e: July 27, 2015 at 8:42:42 AM EDT 

Cc: "Muchmore, 

<muchmored @ michig a n.g o v>. "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" <clemente @m ich iga n. go v> 

Subject: Re: Water Filter 


Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Wednesday, July 29, 2015 1:43 PM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Fwd: Water Filter 


Thank you. We will work with ^^|to identify the appropriate entity to receive the filters for 
Flint residents. In addition, we'll keep you out the public eye on this. 

Please know, however, how much we appreciate ^^Jand most importantly you for doing this. 

Best, 

Harvey 


On Jul 27, 2015, at 7:44 AM, 



wrote: 


Harvey - 


We are all set. ^^^^^^|can serve as liaison on this one. The merchant team 
can source 1,500 filters. We will get them to the community at cost. My guess is 
this will be $20k or so, but the team will give you a final number. 


Because we don't want to be a state vendor, we won't sell them to you. ^Hw ill 
work out logistics of whether we make a donation of gift cards to the state that 
you use to purchase them, or whether there is some other entity to which we can 
give them. 


l 







Given all the circumstances, we are not inte rested in any public ity. We want it to 
be clear that the state is providing these, not I 


Thanks for reaching out. 



Original Message 

From: Flollins, Harvey (GOV) [mailto.hollinsh@michigan.gov l 

Sent: Thursday, July 23, 2015 12:20 PM 

Subject: RE: Water Filter 
Thank you. 

Original Message 

From | 

Sent: Thursday, July 23, 2015 10:57 AM 
To: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: 

Subject: RE: Water Filter 
Will get back soon. 

Original Message 

From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) [ mat Ito : ho! I in sh@.m ichi gan. gov] 

Sent: Wednesday, July 22, 2015 12:17 PM 



Subject: Water Filter 



Per our last conversation, I expressed that we were interested acquiring and 
distributing 1500 water filters to Flint residents to assist with the quality 
(perceived or real) of their drinking water until the KWA pipeline comes online. 

A few weeks ago, you asked me to send you the product ID number so you could 
check with your suppliers regarding price. I apologize for taking long to send you 
product ID; a number of conversations needed to occur in Flint before we could 
proceed. 


2 









The product ID for a Brita Filter for kitchen faucets is: 
Product ID 3176421 
UPC 7-23987-0078 


Thank you for taking the time to look into this. 
Best, 

Harvey Hollins III, Director 
Governor’s Office of Urban Initiatives 

3 13.456.4994< tel:3 1 3 456 . 4994 > (office) 



NOTE: This electronic message and any files transmitted with it are confidential 
and intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom they are 
addressed. If you have received this message in error, any unauthorized review, 
use, disclosure, distribution or copying of this message is prohibited. If you are 
not the intended recipient, please contact the sender by reply e-mail and destroy 
all copies of the original message. Unless expressly stated in this e-mail, nothing 
in this message should be construed as a digital or electronic signature or writing 


NOTE: This electronic message and any files transmitted with it are confidential 
and intended solely for the use of the individual or entity to whom they are 
addressed. If you have received this message in error, any unauthorized review, 
use, disclosure, distribution or copying of this message is prohibited. If you are 
not the intended recipient, please contact the sender by reply e-mail and destroy 
all copies of the original message. Unless expressly stated in this e-mail, nothing 
in this message should be construed as a digital or electronic signature or writing 


3 



Wednesday, July 29, 2015 1:56 PM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: Re: Water Filter 


We are actually good to go and ready to ship vice copied the VP over the area and my assistant. 

Just let us know the "ship to" and we are on our way. 


On Jul 29, 2015, at 1:47 PM, Clayton, Stacie (GOV) < claytons3 fflj.tnichigan. gov > wrote: 



I hope you are doing well and enjoying your summer. Please let me know a convenient 
time for a phone call with you so we can discuss the water filters. 

Thank you, 

Stacie 

Stacie Clayton, Assistant Director 
Harvey Hollins III, Director 
Governor’s Office of Urban Initiatives 
3044 West Grand Boulevard, Ste. 14-650 
Detroit, Ml 48202 
313.456.4994 (office) 
ciavtons3@michigan.gov 


From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 1:43 PM 
To: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: Water Filter 


Best, 

Harvey 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Hollins, Harvey (GOV)" <hoilinsh@mlchi gan. gov> 

Dat e: July 27, 2015 at 8:42:42 AM EDT 

Cc: "Muchmore, 

< muchmored@.roichigan.gov >. "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" 


l 





<clemente @ mich iga n.g o v> 

Subject: Re: Water Filter 



Thank you. We will work with ^^Hto identify the appropriate entity to receive 
the filters for Flint residents. In addition, we'll keep you out the public eye on 
this. 


Please know, however, how much we appreciate 
for doing this. 



and most importantly you 


Best, 

Harvey 


On Jul 27, 2015, at 7:44 AM, — 

wrote 


Harvey - 


We are all set. ^^^^^^|can serve as liaison on this one. The 
merchant team can source 1,500 filters. We will get them to the 
community at cost. My guess is this will be $20k or so, but the 
team will give you a final number. 


Beca use we don't want to be a state vendor, we won't sell them to 
you. ^^Hwill work out logistics of whether we make a donation 
of gift cards to the state that you use to purchase them, or whether 
there is some other entity to which we can give them. 


Given all the circumstances, we are not interested in any 
pu blicity. We want it to be clear that the state is providing these, 

not^^^l. 


Thanks for reaching out. 



Original Message 

From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) [mailto:holiinsh@michigari.gov] 

Sent: Thursday, July 23, 2015 12:20 PM 


2 









Subject: RE: Water Filter 


Thank you. 

Original Message 

From: 

Sent: Thursday, July 23, 2015 10:57 AM 
To: Flollins, Flarvey (GOV) 

Cc: 

Subject: RE: Water Filter 
Will get back soon. 

Original Message 

From: Flollins, Flarvey (GOV) [mailto. honinsh@.michigan. gov ) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 22, 2015 12:17 PM 
To: 

Subject: Water Filter 



Per our last conversation, I expressed that we were interested 
acquiring and distributing 1500 water filters to Flint residents to 
assist with the quality (perceived or real) of their drinking water 
until the KWA pipeline comes online. 


A few weeks ago, you asked me to send you the product ID 
number so you could check with your suppliers regarding price. I 
apologize for taking long to send you product ID; a number of 
conversations needed to occur in Flint before we could proceed. 


The product ID for a Brita Filter for kitchen faucets is: 
Product ID 3176421 
UPC 7-23987-0078 


Thank you for taking the time to look into this. 
Best, 

Harvey Hollins III, Director 
Governor’s Office of Urban Initiatives 


3 






313.456.4994< tel:3 13.456.4994 > (office) 



NOTE: This electronic message and any files transmitted with it 
are confidential and intended solely for the use of the individual or 
entity to whom they are addressed. If you have received this 
message in error, any unauthorized review, use, disclosure, 
distribution or copying of this message is prohibited. If you are not 
the intended recipient, please contact the sender by reply e-mail 
and destroy all copies of the original message. Unless expressly 
stated in this e-mail, nothing in this message should be construed 
as a digital or electronic signature or writing. 


NOTE: This electronic message and any files transmitted with it 
are confidential and intended solely for the use of the individual or 
entity to whom they are addressed. If you have received this 
message in error, any unauthorized review, use, disclosure, 
distribution or copying of this message is prohibited. If you are not 
the intended recipient, please contact the sender by reply e-mail 
and destroy all copies of the original message. Unless expressly 
stated in this e-mail, nothing in this message should be construed 
as a digital or electronic signature or writing. 


4 



Wednesday, July 29, 2015 5:28 PM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 


From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: Re: Water Filter 


They are actually being donated. 


On Jul 29, 2015, at 5:23 PM, Clayton, Stacie (GOV) <davtQns3@michigan.gov > wrote: 

Thank you, ^^|for the quick response. Harve^oe^tav^i^dditional question. Is 
the plan for the state to purchase the filters or is l^^^f^^m^donating 
them? The former is fine and the latter is great. If we purchase them we have to 
determine the process. If they are donated, I will identify the location in Flint where they 
will be shipped. 

Stacie 


Sent: Wednesdayjdl^9^S^!5^^^^^^^^^^^ 

To: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: Re: Water Filter 

We are actually good to go and ready to ship vice copied the VP over the area and my 
assistant. 

Just let us know the "ship to" and we are on our way. 


On Jul 29, 2015, at 1:47 PM, Clayton, Stacie (GOV) <cl av tons3 @m ichig a n, g o v> wrote: 



I hope you are doing well and enjoying your summer. Please let me know 
a convenient time for a phone call with you so we can discuss the water 
filters. 

Thank you, 

Stacie 


Stacie Clayton, Assistant Director 
Harvey Hollins III, Director 
Governor’s Office of Urban Initiatives 


l 







3044 West Grand Boulevard, Ste. 14-650 
Detroit, Ml 48202 
313.456.4994 (office) 

elaytons3@michiqan.gov 


From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 1:43 PM 
To: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: Water Filter 


Best, 

Harvey 

Begin forwarded message: 

Front: "Hollins, Harvey (GOV)" < hol iinsh@michi gan. gov > 

Dat e: July 27, 2015 at 8:42:42 AM EDT 

To: 

Cc: "Muchmore, 

Dennis (GOV)" <muchmored @ mich ig an. gov>. "Clement, 
Elizabeth (GOV)" < clemente@niichi uan.gov > 

Subject: Re: Water Filter 

to identify the appropriate 

entity to receive the filters for Flint residents. In addition, we'll 
keep you out the public eye on this. 

Please know, however, how much we appreciate ^^^Jind most 
importantly you for doing this. 

Best, 

Harvey 



ank you. We will work with | 


On Jul 27, 2015, at 7:44 AM, 



Harvey - 


We are all set. serve as liaison on 

this one. The merchant team can source 1,500 
filters. We will get them to the community at 
cost. My guess is this will be $20k or so, but the 
team will give you a final number. 


2 








Because we don't want to be a state vendor, we 
won't sell them to you. ^^^|will work out 
logistics of whether we make a donation of gift 
cards to the state that you use to purchase them, or 
whether there is some other entity to which we can 
give them. 


Given all the circumstances, we are not interested in 
any publicity. We wa nt it to be c lear that the state 
is providing these, not WCiPP^ i 


Thanks for reaching out. 



Original Message 

From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

[mailto:lu>{.iinsh @ rnlch i ga n. go v] 

Sent: Thursday, July 23, 2015 12:20 PM 
Subject: RE: Water Filter 


Thank you. 



Sent: Thursday, July 23, 2015 10:57 AM 
To: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: RE: Water Filter 

Will get back soon. 


Original Message 

From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

[ mai Ito : hoi \ in s h@michi gan, gov ] 

Sent: Wednesday, July 22, 2015 12:17 PM 


3 







Subject: Water Filter 



Per our last conversation, I expressed that we were 
interested acquiring and distributing 1500 water 
filters to Flint residents to assist with the quality 
(perceived or real) of their drinking water until the 
KWA pipeline comes online. 


A few weeks ago, you asked me to send you the 
product ID number so you could check with your 
suppliers regarding price. I apologize for taking 
long to send you product ID; a number of 
conversations needed to occur in Flint before we 
could proceed. 


The product ID for a Brita Filter for kitchen faucets 
is: 

Product ID 3176421 
UPC 7-23987-0078 


Thank you for taking the time to look into this. 


Best, 

Harvey Hollins III, Director 
Governor’s Office of Urban Initiatives 


3 1 3 ,456.4994<tel: 3 1 3 . 456. 4994> (office) 



NOTE: This electronic message and any files 
transmitted with it are confidential and intended 
solely for the use of the individual or entity to 
whom they are addressed. If you have received this 
message in error, any unauthorized review, use, 
disclosure, distribution or copying of this message 
is prohibited. If you are not the intended recipient, 
please contact the sender by reply e-mail and 
destroy all copies of the original message. Unless 
expressly stated in this e-mail, nothing in this 


4 




message should be construed as a digital or 
electronic signature or writing. 


NOTE: This electronic message and any files 
transmitted with it are confidential and intended 
solely for the use of the individual or entity to 
whom they are addressed. If you have received this 
message in error, any unauthorized review, use, 
disclosure, distribution or copying of this message 
is prohibited. If you are not the intended recipient, 
please contact the sender by reply e-mail and 
destroy all copies of the original message. Unless 
expressly stated in this e-mail, nothing in this 
message should be construed as a digital or 
electronic signature or writing. 


5 



From: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: 

Thursday, July 30, 2015 9:47 AM 

To: 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: 

Clayton, Stacie (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Water Filter 

Harvey- 



Treasury gave us the financial info and KWA info the ministers wanted last week and Tom and Wayne are 
coming to the meeting. Brad has the test results and the science guy to explain the lead issue and you have the 
filters (I'd keep that to yourself and bring one to the meeting so you can be a hero). Frankly, I don't see what 
else we can do. They aren't paying more, the water is ok, and KWA is the long term answer. If they don't like 
the Mayor, the primary is Tuesday and we really can't get involved in that. 

On Jul 29, 2015, at 6:58 PM, Hollins, Harvey (GOV) < hol 1 insh@nnchi gan. gov > wrote: 

We cannot express how much we appreciate this. Thank you! ! 

Best, 

Harvey 

On at PM, 

They are actually being donated. 


On Jul 29, 2015, at 5:23 PM, Clayton, Stacie (GOV) <cl a v ion s3 @.m ichi g a n. go v> 
wrote: 


Thank you,^^^|for the quick response. Harvey does have 
an additional question. Is the plan for the state to purchase 
the filters or is the^^^^^^^^^Jdonating them? The 
former is fine and the latter is great. If we purchase them we 


have to determine the process. If they are donated, I will 


identify the location in Flint where they will be shipped. 


Stacie 


FrorrcJ - 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 1:56 PM 
To: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Cc: 

Subject: Re: Water Filter 

We are actually good to go and ready to ship vice copied 
the VP over the area and my assistant. 


l 





Just let us know the "ship to" and we are on our way. 


On Jul 29, 2015, at 1:47 PM, Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

< elaytons3 @michl gan. gov > wrote: 



I hope you are doing well and enjoying your 
summer. Please let me know a convenient time 
for a phone call with you so we can discuss the 
water filters. 

Thank you, 

Stacie 

Stacie Clayton, Assistant Director 
Harvey Hollins III, Director 
Governor’s Office of Urban Initiatives 
3044 West Grand Boulevard, Ste. 14-650 
Detroit, Ml 48202 
313.456.4994 (office) 
claytons3@michiQ a n.g o v 


From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 1:43 PM 
To: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: Water Filter 


Best, 

Harvey 

Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Hollins, Harvey (GOV)" 

<holli rtsh @m i chi g a n . ao v> 

Date: July 27, 2015 at 8:42:42 AM 
EDT 



"Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 

<rmichmored @ mlchi g a n. g o v>. 


"Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" 
< clemente@michi gan, gov > 

Subject: Re: Water Filter 


2 




Thank you. We will work with 
■gftfl to identify the appropriate 
entity to receive the filters for Flint 
residents. In addition, we'll keep you 
out the public eye on this. 


Please know, however, how much 
we appreciate ^^^^nd most 
importantly you for doing this. 


Best, 

Harvey 


On Jul 27, 2015, at 



Harvey - 


We are all set. 
HSlBcan serve as 
liaison on this 
one. The merchant 
team can source 1,500 
filters. We will get 
them to the 
community at 
cost. My guess is this 
will be $20k or so, but 
the team will give you 
a final number. 


Because we don't 
want to be a state 
vendor, we won't sell 
them to you.JgigiSl 
will work out logistics 
of whether we make a 
donation of gift cards 
to the state that you 
use to purchase them. 


3 







or whether there is 
some other entity to 
which we can give 
them. 


Given all the 
circumstances, we are 
not interested in any 
publicity. We want it 
to be clear that the 
state is providing 
these, not ^^^51 


Thanks for reaching 
out. 



Original 

Message 

From: Hollins, 

Harvey (GOV) 

[mailto:hollinsh@:mic 

higan.gov] 

Sent: Thursday, July 
23, 2015 12:20 PM 

Subject: RE: Water 
Filter 


Thank you. 


Original 



Sent: Thursday, July 
23,2015 10:57 AM 

To: Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) 



4 






Subject: RE: Water 
Filter 


Will get back soon. 


Original 

Message 

From: Flollins, 

Flarvey (GOV) 

[ mat Ito • hoi I in s h@m i c 
h iga n. go v] 

Sent: Wednesday, 

July 22, 2015 12:17 
PM 



Subject: Water Filter 



Per our last 
conversation, I 
expressed that we 
were interested 
acquiring and 
distributing 1500 
water filters to Flint 
residents to assist 
with the quality 
(perceived or real) of 
their drinking water 
until the KWA 
pipeline comes 
online. 


A few weeks ago, you 
asked me to send you 
the product ID 
number so you could 
check with your 
suppliers regarding 
price. I apologize for 
taking long to send 
you product ID; a 
number of 

conversations needed 
to occur in Flint 


5 




before we could 
proceed. 


The product ID for a 
Brita Filter for 
kitchen faucets is: 

Product ID 3176421 

UPC 7-23987-0078 


Thank you for taking 
the time to look into 
this. 


Best, 

Harvey Hollins III, 
Director 

Governor’s Office of 
Urban Initiatives 


3 13.456.4994< tel:3 1 3 
.456.4994> (office) 



NOTE: This 
electronic message 
and any files 
transmitted with it are 
confidential and 
intended solely for the 
use of the individual 
or entity to whom 
they are addressed. If 
you have received this 
message in error, any 
unauthorized review, 
use, disclosure, 
distribution or 
copying of this 
message is prohibited. 
If you are not the 
intended recipient, 
please contact the 


6 





sender by reply e-mail 
and destroy all copies 
of the original 
message. Unless 
expressly stated in 
this e-mail, nothing in 
this message should 
be construed as a 
digital or electronic 
signature or writing. 


NOTE: This 
electronic message 
and any files 
transmitted with it are 
confidential and 
intended solely for the 
use of the individual 
or entity to whom 
they are addressed. If 
you have received this 
message in error, any 
unauthorized review, 
use, disclosure, 
distribution or 
copying of this 
message is prohibited. 
If you are not the 
intended recipient, 
please contact the 
sender by reply e-mail 
and destroy all copies 
of the original 
message. Unless 
expressly stated in 
this e-mail, nothing in 
this message should 
be construed as a 
digital or electronic 
signature or writing. 


7 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 

Subject: 


Thursday, July 30, 2015 5:03 PM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 


Re: Water Filter 


I will pass on to copy all. 

Thanks, 



On Jul 30, 2015, at 3:04 PM, Clayton, Stacie (GOV) < claytons3 (aj.michtgan. gov > wrote: 



Thank you, again. Below is the address for delivery of the water filters. Is it possible for 
me to receive a notice when they are shipped and a tracking number? That way I can 
ensure someone is at the church the day of delivery. 

Deliver to: 

Pastor Allen Overton 
Mt. Carmel Baptist Church 
1610 West Pierson Road 
Flint, Ml 48504 
810.397.0219 

Please let me know if you need anything else from me. 

Stacie 

313.456.4994 (office) 

daytons3@michigan.gov 


From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 6:58 PM 

To: 

Cc: Clayton, Stacie (GOV): jrssrrrr^^ 

Subject: Re: Water Filter 

We cannot express how much we appreciate this. Thank you! ! 

Best, 

Harvey 

On Jul 29, 2015, at 5:27 PM, 


wrote: 


l 







They are actually being donated. 


On Jul 29, 2015, at 5:23 PM, Clayton, Stacie (GOV) <cla yt ons3 @. niichi gan. go v> 
wrote: 


an additional q uestion. 
the filters or is 


Thank you,^^^p ; or the quick response. Harvey does have 

Is the plan for the state to purchase 
donating them? The 
former is fine and the latter is great. If we purchase them we 
have to determine the process. If they are donated, I will 
identify the location in Flint where they will be shipped. 


Stacie 


From: J .... , , - 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 1:56 PM 
To: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

" J i i 

Subject: Re: Water Filter 

We are actually good to go and ready to ship vice copied 
the VP over the area and my assistant. 

Just let us know the "ship to" and we are on our way. 


On Jul 29, 2015, at 1:47 PM, Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

<claytons3 @michig a n. go v> wrote : 



I hope you are doing well and enjoying your 
summer. Please let me know a convenient time 
for a phone call with you so we can discuss the 
water filters. 

Thank you, 

Stacie 

Stacie Clayton, Assistant Director 
Harvey Hollins III, Director 
Governor’s Office of Urban Initiatives 
3044 West Grand Boulevard, Ste. 14-650 
Detroit, Ml 48202 
313.456.4994 (office) 
clavtons3@rnichiqari.gov 


2 




From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 1:43 PM 
To: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: Water Filter 


Best, 

Harvey 


Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Hollins, Harvey (GOV)" 
<hollinsh@ m ichig a ri. g ov> 

Date: July 27, 2015 at 8:42:42 AM 
EDT 



"Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" 
<muchmored @ michi g a n. g o v>. 

"Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" 


<clemente@mich iga n. go v> 

Subject: Re: Water Filter 


Thank you. We will work with 
^Bto identify the appropriate 
entity to receive the filters for Flint 
residents. In addition, we'll keep you 
out the public eye on this. 


Please know, however, how much 
we appreciate an d most 

importantly you for doing this. 


Best, 

Harvey 


On Jul 27, 2015, at 
7:44 AM, 


rote: 

3 




Harvey - 


We are all set. - 

l^i|j§|can serve as 
liaison on this 
one. The merchant 
team can source 1,500 
filters. We will get 
them to the 
community at 
cost. My guess is this 
will be $20k or so, but 
the team will give you 
a final number. 


Because we don't 
want to be a state 
vendor, we won't sell 
them to you-EMIS 
will work ouUogistics 
of whether we make a 
donation of gift cards 
to the state that you 
use to purchase them, 
or whether there is 
some other entity to 
which we can give 
them. 


Given all the 
circumstances, we are 
not interested in any 
publicity. We want it 
to be clear that the 
state is providing 
these, not 


Thanks for reaching 
out. 



Original 

Message 


4 








From: Hollins, 

Harvey (GOV) 

[rnaiho:holiinsb @ mic 
higan goy] 

Sent: Thursday, July 
23, 2015 12:20 PM 

To: 

Subject: RE: Water 
Filter 


Thank you. 


Original 

Message 



Sent: Thursday, July 
23, 2015 10:57 AM 

To: Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) 



Subject: RE: Water 
Filter 


Will get back soon. 


Original 

Message 

From: Hollins, 

Harvey (GOV) 

[ niailto:hoilinsh@mic 
higan gov ] 

Sent: Wednesday, 

July 22, 2015 12:17 
PM 

To: ABBESS! 

Subject: Water Filter 



Per our last 
conversation, I 
expressed that we 


5 





were interested 
acquiring and 
distributing 1500 
water filters to Flint 
residents to assist 
with the quality 
(perceived or real) of 
their drinking water 
until the KWA 
pipeline comes 
online. 


A few weeks ago, you 
asked me to send you 
the product ID 
number so you could 
check with your 
suppliers regarding 
price. I apologize for 
taking long to send 
you product ID; a 
number of 

conversations needed 
to occur in Flint 
before we could 
proceed. 


The product ID for a 
Brita Filter for 
kitchen faucets is: 

Product ID 3176421 

UPC 7-23987-0078 


Thank you for taking 
the time to look into 
this. 


Best, 

Harvey Hollins III, 
Director 

Governor’s Office of 
Urban Initiatives 


313 .456.4994<tel:3 1 3 
, 456 , 4994 > (office) 


6 



NOTE: This 
electronic message 
and any files 
transmitted with it are 
confidential and 
intended solely for the 
use of the individual 
or entity to whom 
they are addressed. If 
you have received this 
message in error, any 
unauthorized review, 
use, disclosure, 
distribution or 
copying of this 
message is prohibited. 
If you are not the 
intended recipient, 
please contact the 
sender by reply e-mail 
and destroy all copies 
of the original 
message. Unless 
expressly stated in 
this e-mail, nothing in 
this message should 
be construed as a 
digital or electronic 
signature or writing. 


NOTE: This 
electronic message 
and any files 
transmitted with it are 
confidential and 
intended solely for the 
use of the individual 
or entity to whom 
they are addressed. If 
you have received this 


7 




message in error, any 
unauthorized review, 
use, disclosure, 
distribution or 
copying of this 
message is prohibited. 
If you are not the 
intended recipient, 
please contact the 
sender by reply e-mail 
and destroy all copies 
of the original 
message. Unless 
expressly stated in 
this e-mail, nothing in 
this message should 
be construed as a 
digital or electronic 
signature or writing. 


fJOTE: This electronic message and any f::@s transmitted with it ara confidential arid intended scieiy tor the use of the individual or entity to whom they airs 
addrassad. it you have received this message in error, any unauthorized review, use, disclosure. distribution or copying of this message is prohibited, it you are 
not the intended recipient, piease contact the sender by reply e-mail and destroy a!: copies of the original message. Unless expressly stated in this s-mali, nothing 
ih th/d massages should be construed as a digital or electronic signature ar writing 


8 




From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Friday, July 31, 2015 11:39 AM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

FW: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Friday, July 31, 2015 11:38:29 AM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada) 
To: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: RE: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 


I can do it here, can't go to Flint, 


From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 11:21 AM 
To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Cc: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: Re: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

If your schedule permits, let's go to Flint to meet with them next week, or we can ask them to come back to Lansing. We 
should convey the response verbally and in person. If you're open to it, I'll ask Stacie to schedule that meeting next 
week. 

Best, 

Harvey 


On Jul 29, 2015, at 9:03 AM, Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) < niuchniored@mich = : gan .gov> wrote: 


Here's the answers to some of the questions. How do you want to approach the pastors and community 
leaders, we owe them answers to the questions they asked. 


From: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 8:36 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Subject: FW: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Importance: High 


Ali, Attached is a memo and water rate summary answering several of the questions raised by the Flint 
pastors. Please let me know if you have any questions. Wayne 


Wayne L. Workman 
Deputy State Treasurer 
Michigan Department of Treasury 


From: Cline, Richard (Treasury) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 8:21 AM 


l 



To: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Cc: Dempkowski, Angela (Treasury); Byrne, Randall (Treasury) 

Subject: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Importance: High 

Wayne, 

Attached is the water rate table you asked for and I have updated the memo to reference this as an 
attachment. 

If you need anything else, please let me know. 

Note that Rob, Randy and I will be in Benton Harbor for a portion of today conducting their annual RTAB 
evaluation. 


Eric Cline j Department Manager 

State of Michigan j Michigan Department of Treasury j Office of Fiscal Responsibility 
430 W, Allegan Street, 3rd Flo or j Lansing, M? 48922 

Lansing Office (517) 335-2078 Traverse City Office (231) 922-5228 

E-mail diner 1 @ m ichig a n . go v '(III. 'Prl lM 


CONFIDENT! AUTY NOTICE: This e-mail, and any attachments, is for the sole use of the intended recipients) and 
may contain information that is confidential and protected from disclosure under the law. Any unauthorized review, 
use, disclosure, or distribution is prohibited. If you are not the intended recipient, please contact the sender by reply 
e-maii, snd delete/destroy a!! copies of the original message and attachments Thank you. 


<Memo on Water Coalition Questions III. 07-29-1 5. docx> 
<Flint Water Rate History FESTAL 02.1 1.15. pdf> 


2 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Monday, August 03, 2015 11:52 AM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

FW: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, August 03, 2015 11:51:47 AM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada) 

To: Lyon, Nick (DCH); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) 

Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Grijalva, Nancy (DCH) 

Subject: RE: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 


Can I reprint Nancy's email? 


From: Lyon, Nick (DCH) 

Sent: Friday, July 31, 2015 10:57 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, 
Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Grijalva, Nancy (DCH) 

Subject: Re: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Our Public Health staff followed up a bit more on the lead question. Below is their email update to me. 

From: Grijalva, Nancy (DCH) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 11:23 AM 
To: Lyon, Nick (DCH) 

Subject: FW: Director's Office Assignment -- Flint - need update asap 
FYI 

Original Message 

From: Peeler, Nancy (DCH) 

Sent: Tuesday, July 28, 2015 2:57 PM 

To: Anderson, Paula (DCH); Miller, Corinne (DCH); Travis, Rashmi (DCH); Moran, Susan (DCH); Grijalva, Nancy 
(DCH); Fink, Brenda (DCH) 

Cc: Priem, Wesley F. (DCH); Dykema, Linda D. (DCH); Bouters, Janese (DCH); Barr, Jacqui (DCH) 

Subject: RE: Director's Office Assignment -- Flint - need update asap 

I apologize for the delay in responding more specifically to this assignment, it took some time to review our 
Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention program data to see if it might contribute to the understanding of the 
situation in Flint with their water supply. Here is what we found: 

We looked at lead testing results for May 2014-April 2015, which is the 12 month time frame just after Flint 
started drawing their water from the river (water source changed in April 2014). 


l 



We compared lead testing rates and lead testing results to the same time frame for the previous 3 years, to 
see if there were any patterns that suggested that there were increased rates of lead poisoning after the 
water supply was switched. Per the attached charts - 

• Lead testing rates remained about the same from year to year (chart on the right). 

• There was a spike in elevated blood lead tests from July-September 2014 (chart on the left, gold line). 

• However that pattern was not terribly different from what we saw in the previous three years, especially 
in 2011-2012 (we are working with our Epidemiologist to statistically verify any significant differences). 

• We commonly see a 'seasonal effect' with lead, related to people opening and closing windows more 
often in the summer, which disturbs old deteriorating paint on the windows, sills and sashes. Window fans 
frequently blow and spread the lead dust from the deteriorating paint to other parts of the room/house. We 
suspect that the summer data spike may be related to this effect. 

• If the home water supply lines and/or river water were contributing to elevated blood lead tests, we 
expected that the increased rates would extend beyond the summer, but they drop quite a bit from 
September to October, stayed low over the winter, and are just starting to tail up again in the spring of 2015. 

So upon review, we don't believe our data demonstrates an increase in lead poisoning rates that might be 
attributable to the change in water source for Flint. We recognize that lead exposure via the water is only a 
small piece of what may be happening for families in Flint, however, we hope the information is helpful. 

Nancy Peeler 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 9:02 AM 

To: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV) 

Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Subject: RE: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

I think this information is very helpful, it will not answer the main question about the quality of the water (DEQ is 
working on that through Brad I believe), and the color and smell of the present water, but it does get us to the answers 
to the less subjective issues. Frankly, the only way the issues will be totally resolved is when the KWA comes on line and 
the water is perceived to be cleaner and healthier. 

I am somewhat surprised that the leadership in Flint has not responded better to the community questions, which don't 
seem unreasonable at all. Seems like Harvey has a better network into some of the neighborhoods than the city- 
does. The KWA PR department definitely needs to do some outreach or they're headed down the same road as 
DWSD. Do you know if they go out on a regular basis to the community and talk about the rates, costs, etc.? 


From: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 8:36 AM 

To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 
Cc: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV) 

Subject: FW: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Importance: High 


2 





AH, Attached is a memo and water rate summary answering several of the questions raised by the Flint pastors. Please 
let me know if you have any questions. Wayne 


Wayne L Workman 
Deputy State Treasurer 
Michigan Department of Treasury 


From: Cline, Richard (Treasury) 

Sent: Wednesday, July 29, 2015 8:21 AM 
To: Workman, Wayne (TREASURY) 

Cc: Dempkowski, Angela (Treasury); Byrne, Randall (Treasury) 

Subject: Updated Memo on Water Coalition Questions - July 29 

Importance: High 

Wayne, 

Attached is the water rate table you asked for and I have updated the memo to reference this as an attachment. 

If you need anything else, please let me know. 

Note that Rob, Randy and I will be in Benton Harbor for a portion of today conducting their annual RTAB evaluation. 


Eric Cline j Department Manager 

State of Michigan j Michigan Department of Treasury j Office of Fiscal Responsibility 
430 W. Allegan Street, 3rd 

Lansing Office 335-2078 j | Traverse 922-5228 

E-mail clmerl@micMgan.gov 


CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: This e-mail, end eny attachments, is for the sole use of the intended recipient(s) and may contain 
information that is confidential and protected from disclosure under the lavs. Any unauthorized review, use, disclosure, or distribution 
is prohibited. If you are not the intended recipient , please contact the sender by reply e-mail, and delete/destroy ail copies of the 
original message and attachments Thank you. 


3 




From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Monday, August 03, 2015 11:55 AM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

FW: dennis muchmore has sent you - Flint pastors tell residents to get their water 
tested - from Detroit News 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, August 03, 2015 11:54:56 AM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada) 

To: Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Wurfel, Sara (GOV); Wurfel, Brad 
(DEQ); Agen, Jarrod (GOV) 

Cc: Clement, Elizabeth (GOV) 

Subject: FW: dennis muchmore has sent you - Flint pastors tell residents to get their water tested - from Detroit News 
Here's part of our on-going problem. 

Original Message 

From: do-not-replv@detroitnevvs.CQm [mailto:do--not-replv@detroitnews.com1 

Sent: Monday, August 3, 2015 11:49 AM 
To: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Subject: dennis muchmore has sent you - Flint pastors tell residents to get their water tested - from Detroit News 


Message from: 


Flint pastors tell residents to get their water tested 


Some area pastors held a rally Sunday to urge residents to get their tap water tested 


Check out this story on detroitnews.com: http://detne.ws/lSAHlK6 




From: 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: 

Wednesday, September 02, 2015 3:13 PM 

To: 

Snyder, Rick (GOV); Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod 
(GOV) 

Cc: 

Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: 

Flint Water Filters 


As you know, 


comfort amid concerns about Flint's water quality 
donation. 


[donated 1500 kitchen^ate^filter^for Flint residents as a way of providing added 

do not want any publicity or credit for the 


The filters were delivered to the Concerned Pastors organization, who held an event yesterday to give away the filters. 
Residents were invited to come to a central location to pick up their filter. The Concerned Pastors targeted low income 
Flint residents. 


More than 1500 households showed up yesterday to pick up a filter; the Concerned Pastors exhausted the donated 
supply in 4 hours with 200 people still waiting to get a filter. 

Best, 

Flarvey 


l 



From: 

Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

Sent: 

Saturday, September 05, 2015 2:00 PM 

To: 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clayton, 
Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Flint Water Filters 


Factually accurate update; but how did it go over with the residents? 

Thanks 

Rick 

> On Sep 2, 2015, at 3:13 PM, Hollins, Harvey (GOV) <honinsh @ micbi g an. g ov> wrote: 

> 

> As you know,^^^^^^^^^^donated 1500 kitchen water filters for Flint residents as a way of providing added 
comfort amid concerns about Flint's water quality.^^^^^^^^^^Jdo not want any publicity or credit for the 
donation. 

> 

> The filters were delivered to the Concerned Pastors organization, who held an event yesterday to give away the filters. 
Residents were invited to come to a central location to pick up their filter. The Concerned Pastors targeted low income 
Flint residents. 

> 

> More than 1500 households showed up yesterday to pick up a filter; the Concerned Pastors exhausted the donated 
supply in 4 hours with 200 people still waiting to get a filter. 

> 

> Best, 

> Harvey 


l 


From: 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: 

Saturday, September 05, 2015 3:14 PM 

To: 

Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

Cc: 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clayton, 
Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: 

Re: Flint Water Filters 


Governor, it went over extremely well with the residents. There is a demand for more. 

Best, 

Harvey 

> On Sep 5, 2015, at 2:00 PM, Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

> 

> Factually accurate update; but how did it go over with the residents? 

> 

> Thanks 

> Rick 

> 

» On Sep 2, 2015, at 3:13 PM, Hollins, Harvey (GOV) < honinsh(g>michigan.ROV > wrote: 

» 

■ ■ As you know^^^^^^^^^f donated 1500 ki tchen water filters for Flint residents as a way of providing added 
comfort amid concerns about Flint's water quality. not want any publicity or credit for the 

donation. 

» 

» The filters were delivered to the Concerned Pastors organization, who held an event yesterday to give away the 
filters. Residents were invited to come to a central location to pick up their filter. The Concerned Pastors targeted low 
income Flint residents. 

» 

» More than 1500 households showed up yesterday to pick up a filter; the Concerned Pastors exhausted the donated 
supply in 4 hours with 200 people still waiting to get a filter. 

» 

» Best, 

» Harvey 
> 


wrote: 


l 





From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Tuesday, September 15, 2015 9:52 AM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

FW: Flint 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, September 15, 2015 9:51:41 AM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada) 

To: Khouri, Nick (TREASURY); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury); Workman, Wayne (TREASURY); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Wyant, 
Dan (DEQ) 

Cc: Wurfel, Brad (DEQ); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Roberts, John (DTMB) 

Subject: Flint 

Nice of Dayne Walling to work with us before he called yesterday to tell me he was going to announce to City Council 
last night that Flint needs and deserves $30M from the state for upgrades to their water system and a lead abatement 
program. Any thoughts on this? 


l 



Governor Rick Snyder 

December 9, 2015 
Daily Briefing 






Redacted except for 54 



Flint Fast Facts for WFNT interview 
From: Comms - Jess Brown 
DEQ-Brad Wurfel 
DHHS - Jennifer Smith 
Date: December 8, 2015 


1. How many people have been tested since Oct. 1 Flint Water Action Plan was implemented? 

® Total of 1,836 tested, 39 elevated results 
o Children 0 - 5: 806 tested 
o Children 6 - 17: 525 tested 
o Adults: 505 tested 

2. What are the most recent recommendations to protect your family from lead exposure? 

« Protecting your family from lead in the water: 

o Get your water tested for lead. It's free. Call (810) 787-6537 to learn more. 

o Use a water filter in your home. MDHHS continues to provide free water filters and replacement 
cartridges to Flint residents at four locations, including the MDHHS Flint offices and the Genesee 
County Community Action Resource Department. 

o Run only cold water through the filter. 

o If you do not have a water filter, use bottled water for drinking and mixing formula. 

o Use filtered or bottled water for drinking (including making coffee, drink mixes, juice, baby 
formula), and cooking (even if you boil the water, the lead will stay in the water and food). 

o If you have to use unfiltered water for drinking or cooking, run the tap for five minutes before 
using the water 
• Testing children: 

o Children who live in the city of Flint should be tested for lead exposure. This should be done as 
soon as possible. 

o The best place to get your child's blood lead test is your doctor's office. Contact your primary 
care provider. 

o Children can also get a free lead test at the Genesee County Health Department. For help with 
transportation, call 2-1-1. 

® Safe cleaning: 

o Safe cleaning is important. Keeping your home clean and safe from lead hazards will help to 
protect your family. 

o Buildings built before 1978 could have lead paint in them. Use wet paper towels to clean up 
paint chips and dust in these older buildings. Be sure to clean around windows, play areas, and 
floors. 

o Wash hands and toys often with soap and water. 

o You can use unfiltered tap water to wipe down countertops, mop floors, and wash clothes 
The DEQ continues implementing the Governor's 10-point action plan to protect kids and families in Flint: 

1. SCHOOLS TESTING 

® The Governor's plan commits that DEQ will test water in every Flint school. To date, 8 schools in Flint have 
undergone a thorough inspection of their plumbing. Crews from the state are completing one to two schools 
each weekend. 

® The story has been the same in each school inspected: lead exposure has been limited to old drinking 
fountains and faucets that should have been changed out years ago. When these fixtures are run for a 
couple minutes, lead presence drops to safe levels. If / when these fixtures are removed, it will address the 
lead exposure in schools. 

® DEQ has not identified lead in the deeper plumbing of the schools. That's great news. It means fixing the 
issue will be comparatively inexpensive and quick. 









From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Saturday, September 26, 2015 9:26 AM 

To: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: FW: Flint updates 

Attachments: Lead Advisory Release.pdf; ATT00001.htm; BLLs in Flint v2.pptx; ATT00002.htm; FINAL 

Flint Lead TP O92415.docx; ATT00003.htm 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Saturday, September 26, 2015 9:26:09 AM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada) 

To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

Cc: Calley, Brian (GOV); Scott, Allison (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); 
Walsh, John (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Forstner, Nathaniel (GOV) 

Subject: Flint updates 

The memo and attachments below have captured the latest information from the departmental side on Flint 
succinctly. Kildee is engaged in his normal press hound routine, which is unfortunate because he's really a smart, 
talented guy who needs to roll up his sleeves while Ananich is looking for relief but doesn't know where it would come 
from and as usual is a positive force. 

Frankly, I think both know that Walling went out on CYA effort due to the election, but of course can't say so. Neither 
has any idea where his $30M figure came from, or where we would get it even if you were so inclined. 

Originally the thrust for the KWA came from the Genesee County commission and those involved in the planning for 
KWA including the Trades. By the time the council had voted 7-1 for it, Andy Dillon was in the position of signing off on 
it and did. However, it was still the right position for the long term benefit of the city and its future. They of course 
have not been particularly helpful in finding solutions to the issues. I will say that the Drain Commissioner has been a 
good partner and is working overtime on the problem. 

They can't reconnect to DWSD even if they wanted to as they sold the connector line. And, especially with the new rate 
increases in Detroit, their citizens would be less able to pay than they already are. The water certainly has occasional 
less than savory aspects like color because of the apparently more corrosive aspects of the hard water coming from the 
river, but that has died down with the additional main filters. Taste and smell have been problems also and substantial 
money has been extended to work on those issues. 

Now we have the anti everything group turning to the lead content which is a concern for everyone, but DEQ and DHHS 
and EPA can't find evidence of a major change per Geralyn's memo below. Of course, some of the Flint people respond 
by looking for someone to blame instead of working to reduce anxiety. We can't tolerate increased lead levels in any 
event, but it's really the city's water system that needs to deal with it. We're throwing as much assistance as possible at 
the lead problem as regardless of what the levels, explanations or proposed solutions, the residents and particularly the 
poor need help to deal with it. 

It seems that continuing to find funds to buy local residents home filters is really a viable option and Harvey and all are 
pursuing more assistance in that work. Almost all the "experts" I've talked to are convinced the problem is in the old 
lines leading to homes and short of a massive replacement CSO type bond that wouldn't resolve the issue for a couple of 
years, nature (temp reductions), filters and a final connect seem to be the best courses of action. 


l 




The residents are caught in a swirl of misinformation and long term distrust of local government unlikely to be 
resolved. 

Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 


From: "Lasher, Geralyn (DCH)" <iasherg@ mie hi,a;art.Rov> 

Date: September 25, 2015 at 4:47:01 PM EDT 

To: "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" <m ue hm o r ed (S michigan.gov>, "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" 

<demente(g)michigan.gov>, "Lyon, Nick (DCH)" < Lyon N 2 @ m i ch i ga n . goy >, "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" 

< .y. ( .v.b.i 

Cc: "Wurfel, Brad (DEQ)" < ^A/ : ^ gfeS. B Hgi n' : T ?= T) d: > / "Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV)" 

"Grijalva, Nancy (DCH)" <GrjMya^ "Hertel, Elizabeth 

(DCH)" <HerteiE @michigan.gov > 

Subject: Update 

Quick recap on the interactions this week from the MDHHS side on the Flint water issue. 

Today the City of Flint issued the attached "Lead Advisory" for residents to be aware of lead levels in 
drinking water and issued suggestions from the Genesee County Health Department as to what 
residents could do to reduce risk. These include: 

-- flushing cold-water pipes by running water for approximately 5 minutes, 

--using only water from the cold-water tap for drinking, cooking and making baby formula 
-installing a water filter that is NSF-certified for lead removal. 

We worked with the Genesee County Health Department throughout the week to get them in a more 
pro-active mode to provide this guidance publicly and to encourage citizens to have the City test their 
water if they were concerned about the quality of water at their home. The health department also 
issued this fact sheet 

http://www.gchd.us/docyPopular Pages/GCHD Lead in Water Fact Sheet 2 .pdf on Thursday 
providing additional information on the issue. 

MDHHS epidemiologists continue to review the "data" provided by a Hurley hospital physician that 
showed an increase in lead activity following the change in water supply. While we continue to review 
this data, we have stated publicly that Hurley conducted their analysis in a much different way than we 
do at the department. Hurley used two partial years of data, MDHHS looked at five comprehensive 
years and saw no increase outside the normal seasonal increases. The Hurley review was also a much 
smaller sample than MDHHS data as ours includes all hospital systems in Flint as well as outside 
laboratories. 

We have also provide the attached data chart that outlines if the elevated blood lead levels were being 
driven by a change in water, we would have seen the elevated levels remain high after the change in 
water source. 

We have also communicated that for WIC beneficiaries in Flint with documentation of unsanitary water, 
they may be able to receive ready to feed formula and have encouraged families to contact WIC to see if 
they are eligible for this formula. SNAP beneficiaries are able to purchase bottled water with their SNAP 
funds. 

Talking points from MDHHS are attached as well. 


Thank you, 


2 



G 


3 



Jason Lorenz 
Public Information Officer 
Office: (810) 237-2039 


For Immediate Release 



City of Flint Issues Lead Advisory 

Flint, Michigan - September 25, 2015 - The City of Flint is issuing a Lead Advisory for 
residents to be aware of lead levels in drinking water after hearing concerns from the 
medical community. While the City is in full compliance with the Federal Safe Drinking 
Water Act, this information is being shared as part of a public awareness campaign to 
ensure that everyone takes note that no level of lead is considered safe. 

The Genesee County Flealth Department has issued a fact sheet regarding lead 
precautions for residents. The fact sheet can be found on their website at www.achd.us . 
Flere are a few of the suggestions the Health Department recommends: 

■ Flush your cold-water pipes by running the water for approximately 5 minutes 

■ Use only water from the cold-water tap for drinking, cooking, and especially for 
making baby formula. 

■ Install a water filter that is NSF-certified for lead removal. 

Lead contamination can leach into water from a home’s lead water service lines, lead 
solder, and leaded plumbing materials including fixtures, faucets, and fittings. Older 
service lines with pipes and fixtures installed before 1986 can sometimes be more 
susceptible to lead issues due to materials used in the home such as lead based paint 
and lead pipes. 

This message is meant as a precaution to residents and does not mean that all homes in 
th e City will experience the same issue. Residents with concerns about lead service lin es 

City Hall 

1 101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 
810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7218 www.citvofflint.com 





and lead in home plumbing fixtures are encouraged to contact the City’s Utilities Division 
to schedule a free water testing by calling the Water Treatment Plant at 810-787-6537 
and pressing #1 after prompted or by emailing flintwater@cityofflint.com . 

The City of Flint is working proactively along with the County Health Department, the 
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, and the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency to improve the water system throughout the City. An accelerated plan to add a 
corrosion control agent to our water within 30 to 60 days with expedited approval from the 
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality is already underway. This will reduce 
corrosion which can cause lead in old pipes to leach into the water. 

This plan is in addition to Mayor Walling’s letter requesting $30 Million in water 
infrastructure assistance funding from the State of Michigan. $10 Million of that request 
would be for the replacement of lead service lines in households to ensure that lead no 
longer presents a danger to the drinking water of our residents. As the letter states, “It is 
the City’s position that the abatement of lead through the removal of lead containing pipes 
and fixtures in homes is the best long term solution to keeping our residents’ water safe.” 

Mayor Walling further stated: "I am extremely concerned about the risks around lead with 
Flint's children and I will be working tirelessly to ensure the water is safe and all of our 
families have the information they need. I also will continue to pursue funding for 
infrastructure improvements and a comprehensive healthy homes initiative that 
addresses lead in paint and pipes. We have to get the lead out of our community to 
eliminate the threat of childhood lead poisoning." 

The City of Flint continues working proactively with the County Health Department, the 
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, and the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency to improve the water system throughout the City. The City remains committed to 
working with all of our partners in the Water Technical Advisory Committee to address all 

City Hall 

1 101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 
810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7218 www.citvofflint.com 






issues of public health and quality concerns that face the community. Updates on 
progress made in addressing this issue will be made during regular public meetings 
including City Council and other scheduled meetings. Information on this and all related 
matters will continue to be posted on the City of Flint’s website, cityofflint.com. 


-END- 


City Hall 

1 101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 
810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7218 www.citvofflint.com 



Blood Lead Testing of Children in Flint, Before and After the Change in Flint's Water 


The change in Flint's water source occurred in 
April 2014. MDHHS looked at children's blood 
lead levels (BLL) before and after this event. 

The dark blue line (May 2014 - April 2015) and 
the green line (May-August 2015) reflect 
children's blood lead tests after the change. All 
other lines reflect tests before the change. 

An increase in childhood lead poisoning in 
summer (July, August, September) is typical 
throughout Michigan every year. 

While there is a dramatic difference between the 
numbers of elevated BLL in the summer before 
and after the event, a wider look that includes 
data back to 2010 shows that the year BEFORE 
the event (the yellow line) was more of an 
anomaly than the year after (the dark blue line). 

If elevated BLL were being driven by the change 
in water, we would expect the dark blue line to 
stay high rather than follow the seasonal 
pattern. 

All data included in this analysis were reported 
by laboratories directly to MDHHS, in 
accordance with State law. 


City of Flint, Children less than 16 years of age 
with First-Time Elevated Blood Lead Levels* 

35 



0 

May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr 

2010-2011 2011-2012 2012-2013 2013-2014 2014-2015 2015 


*Thisgraph includes: 

Children whose address is listed as "Flint"-may not conform exactly to Flint city limits 

Children less than 16 years of age at time of test 

September 24, 2015 

Only first-time blood lead levels >= 5 ug/dL 

Source: MDHHS Data Warehouse. 

All first-time elevated levels, regardless of sample type (venous, capillary or unknown) 

Lead Specimen table 




Blood Lead Testing of Children in Flint, Before and After the Change in Flint's Water 


Blood lead testing (regardless of elevated 
levels) also tends to rise during late 
summer (August, September, October). 

This graph shows that testing in Flint has 
remained fairly steady over the last five 
years, except for a recent dedine(May- 
August 2015). 


City of Flint, Children less than 16 years of age 
Tested for Lead Poisoning 



*Thisgraph includes: 


Children whose address is listed as "Flint"-may not conform exactly to Flint city limits 


Children less than 16 years of age at time of test 

September 24, 2015 

The number of children tested within each month. 

Source: MDHHS Data Warehouse. 

Some children are tested more than once, and may be included in more than one month or year. Lead seamen table 




Blood Lead Levels in Flint Talking Points 
September 24, 2015 

• Promoting the health of our residents is a statewide priority - a priority that includes 
ensuring clean, safe drinking water for all residents and especially children. 

• The results of the Hurley Children's Hospital are under review by the Michigan 
Department of Health and Human Services. 

• The analysis that Hurley conducted is different from the way MDHHS has analyzed data 
regarding blood lead levels in Flint. 

• MDHHS is looking to see if we can replicate the results of the Hurley study to see how 
they achieved their results. 

MDHHS Blood Lead Testing Results in Flint 

• MDDHS data shows a comprehensive look at the data since 2010, years before the 
change in Flint's water source occurred in April 2014. 

• Each year shows a seasonal increase in childhood lead poisoning in the summer months, 
the highest seasonal increase of which occurred in 2010. 

• If elevated blood lead levels were being driven by the change in water, we would expect 
to see the elevated levels remain high after the change in water source, rather than 
follow the seasonal pattern as they did by decreasing in the fall months. 

• All data included in the MDHHS analysis were reported by laboratories directly to 
MDHHS, in accordance with State Law. 

Differences in Analysis 

• MDHHS data provides a much more robust picture of the entire blood lead levels for the 
Flint area, and specifically, accounts for data over the full course of the past five years. 

• Looking at the past five years as a whole provides a much more accurate look at the 
seasonal trends of lead in the area. 

• Seasonal exposure is higher in the summer for a variety of reasons including children 
playing outside in the soil, and when windows are open and lead paint is more likely to 
be in the air. This seasonal increase would be unrelated to the water system. 

• Our data includes children from the entire city, including all medical facilities, rather 
than just Hurley, has a larger age group of children, and includes a much larger sample 
size. 

• The MDHHS analysis looks specifically at the first elevated blood lead level for each 
child, which provides an accurate picture of when first exposure occurred. 

• The Hurley data includes a smaller sample size, much more limited time period (January- 
September of 2013 and 2015 only), and a smaller age group of children. 



WIC Children 


• In homes with infants on WIC, if the household has documentation from an official 
source of unsanitary water supply issues, that family may be eligible to receive ready-to- 
feed formula. Families should contact WIC to see if they are eligible. 

• Each household would have to be looked at on an individual basis. 

• WIC cannot cover bottled water. 



From: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, September 28, 2015 9:44 AM 

To: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: FW: Update 

Attachments: Lead Advisory Release.pdf; ATT00001.htm; BLLs in Flint v2.pptx; ATT00002.htm; FINAL 

Flint Lead TP O92415.docx; ATT00003.htm 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Monday, September 28, 2015 9:43:54 AM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada) 

To: Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Baird, Richard (GOV); Redford, James (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Forstner, Nathaniel 
(GOV); Mcbride, Bill (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV) 

Subject: Fwd: Update 


Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 

From: "Lasher, Geralyn (DCH)" < iasherg@m=chigan.gov > 

Date: September 25, 2015 at 4:47:01 PM EDT 

To: "Muchmore, Dennis (GOV)" <iTiuchmore d@mich i gan. gov>, "Clement, Elizabeth (GOV)" 
<clemente@michigan.gov>, "Lyon, Nick (DCH)" <Lyon N2@ro i chig amgov>, "Wyant, Dan (DEQ)" 

<WyantD@michigan.gov> 

Cc: "Wurfel, Brad (DEQ)" <VVurfel8@michigan.gov>, "Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV)" 

<vvisrilewsk.lw@michjgan.gov>, "Grijalva, Nancy (DCH)" <GrljaivaN@n-iichig3n.gov>, "Hertel, Elizabeth 
(DCH)" <HerteiE@jTijchig<in.gO¥> 

Subject: Update 

Quick recap on the interactions this week from the MDHHS side on the Flint water issue. 

Today the City of Flint issued the attached "Lead Advisory" for residents to be aware of lead levels in 
drinking water and issued suggestions from the Genesee County Health Department as to what 
residents could do to reduce risk. These include: 

-- flushing cold-water pipes by running water for approximately 5 minutes, 

--using only water from the cold-water tap for drinking, cooking and making baby formula 
--installing a water filter that is NSF-certified for lead removal. 


We worked with the Genesee County Health Department throughout the week to get them in a more 
pro-active mode to provide this guidance publicly and to encourage citizens to have the City test their 
water if they were concerned about the quality of water at their home. The health department also 
issued this fact sheet 


http://www.gdtd.us/docs/Popular Fages/GCHD Lead 

providing additional information on the issue. 


.pdf on Thursday 


MDHHS epidemiologists continue to review the "data" provided by a Hurley hospital physician that 
showed an increase in lead activity following the change in water supply. While we continue to review 


l 




this data, we have stated publicly that Hurley conducted their analysis in a much different way than we 
do at the department. Hurley used two partial years of data, MDHHS looked at five comprehensive 
years and saw no increase outside the normal seasonal increases. The Hurley review was also a much 
smaller sample than MDHHS data as ours includes all hospital systems in Flint as well as outside 
laboratories. 

We have also provide the attached data chart that outlines if the elevated blood lead levels were being 
driven by a change in water, we would have seen the elevated levels remain high after the change in 
water source. 

We have also communicated that for WIC beneficiaries in Flint with documentation of unsanitary water, 
they may be able to receive ready to feed formula and have encouraged families to contact WIC to see if 
they are eligible for this formula. SNAP beneficiaries are able to purchase bottled water with their SNAP 
funds. 

Talking points from MDHHS are attached as well. 

Thank you, 

G 


2 



Jason Lorenz 
Public Information Officer 
Office: (810) 237-2039 


For Immediate Release 



City of Flint Issues Lead Advisory 

Flint, Michigan - September 25, 2015 - The City of Flint is issuing a Lead Advisory for 
residents to be aware of lead levels in drinking water after hearing concerns from the 
medical community. While the City is in full compliance with the Federal Safe Drinking 
Water Act, this information is being shared as part of a public awareness campaign to 
ensure that everyone takes note that no level of lead is considered safe. 

The Genesee County Flealth Department has issued a fact sheet regarding lead 
precautions for residents. The fact sheet can be found on their website at www.achd.us . 
Flere are a few of the suggestions the Health Department recommends: 

■ Flush your cold-water pipes by running the water for approximately 5 minutes 

■ Use only water from the cold-water tap for drinking, cooking, and especially for 
making baby formula. 

■ Install a water filter that is NSF-certified for lead removal. 

Lead contamination can leach into water from a home’s lead water service lines, lead 
solder, and leaded plumbing materials including fixtures, faucets, and fittings. Older 
service lines with pipes and fixtures installed before 1986 can sometimes be more 
susceptible to lead issues due to materials used in the home such as lead based paint 
and lead pipes. 

This message is meant as a precaution to residents and does not mean that all homes in 
th e City will experience the same issue. Residents with concerns about lead service lin es 

City Hall 

1 101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 
810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7218 www.citvofflint.com 






and lead in home plumbing fixtures are encouraged to contact the City’s Utilities Division 
to schedule a free water testing by calling the Water Treatment Plant at 810-787-6537 
and pressing #1 after prompted or by emailing flintwater@cityofflint.com . 

The City of Flint is working proactively along with the County Health Department, the 
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, and the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency to improve the water system throughout the City. An accelerated plan to add a 
corrosion control agent to our water within 30 to 60 days with expedited approval from the 
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality is already underway. This will reduce 
corrosion which can cause lead in old pipes to leach into the water. 

This plan is in addition to Mayor Walling’s letter requesting $30 Million in water 
infrastructure assistance funding from the State of Michigan. $10 Million of that request 
would be for the replacement of lead service lines in households to ensure that lead no 
longer presents a danger to the drinking water of our residents. As the letter states, “It is 
the City’s position that the abatement of lead through the removal of lead containing pipes 
and fixtures in homes is the best long term solution to keeping our residents’ water safe.” 

Mayor Walling further stated: "I am extremely concerned about the risks around lead with 
Flint's children and I will be working tirelessly to ensure the water is safe and all of our 
families have the information they need. I also will continue to pursue funding for 
infrastructure improvements and a comprehensive healthy homes initiative that 
addresses lead in paint and pipes. We have to get the lead out of our community to 
eliminate the threat of childhood lead poisoning." 

The City of Flint continues working proactively with the County Health Department, the 
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, and the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency to improve the water system throughout the City. The City remains committed to 
working with all of our partners in the Water Technical Advisory Committee to address all 

City Hall 

1 101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 
810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7218 www.citvofflint.com 






issues of public health and quality concerns that face the community. Updates on 
progress made in addressing this issue will be made during regular public meetings 
including City Council and other scheduled meetings. Information on this and all related 
matters will continue to be posted on the City of Flint’s website, cityofflint.com. 


-END- 


City Hall 

1 101 S. Saginaw Street - Flint, Michigan 48502 
810-766-7346 FAX: 810-766-7218 www.citvofflint.com 



Blood Lead Testing of Children in Flint, Before and After the Change in Flint's Water 


The change in Flint's water source occurred in 
April 2014. MDHHS looked at children's blood 
lead levels (BLL) before and after this event. 

The dark blue line (May 2014 - April 2015) and 
the green line (May-August 2015) reflect 
children's blood lead tests after the change. All 
other lines reflect tests before the change. 

An increase in childhood lead poisoning in 
summer (July, August, September) is typical 
throughout Michigan every year. 

While there is a dramatic difference between the 
numbers of elevated BLL in the summer before 
and after the event, a wider look that includes 
data back to 2010 shows that the year BEFORE 
the event (the yellow line) was more of an 
anomaly than the year after (the dark blue line). 

If elevated BLL were being driven by the change 
in water, we would expect the dark blue line to 
stay high rather than follow the seasonal 
pattern. 

All data included in this analysis were reported 
by laboratories directly to MDHHS, in 
accordance with State law. 


City of Flint, Children less than 16 years of age 
with First-Time Elevated Blood Lead Levels* 

35 



0 

May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr 

2010-2011 2011-2012 2012-2013 2013-2014 2014-2015 2015 


*Thisgraph includes: 

Children whose address is listed as "Flint"-may not conform exactly to Flint city limits 

Children less than 16 years of age at time of test 

September 24, 2015 

Only first-time blood lead levels >= 5 ug/dL 

Source: MDHHS Data Warehouse. 

All first-time elevated levels, regardless of sample type (venous, capillary or unknown) 

Lead Specimen table 




Blood Lead Testing of Children in Flint, Before and After the Change in Flint's Water 


Blood lead testing (regardless of elevated 
levels) also tends to rise during late 
summer (August, September, October). 

This graph shows that testing in Flint has 
remained fairly steady over the last five 
years, except for a recent dedine(May- 
August 2015). 


City of Flint, Children less than 16 years of age 
Tested for Lead Poisoning 



*Thisgraph includes: 


Children whose address is listed as "Flint"-may not conform exactly to Flint city limits 


Children less than 16 years of age at time of test 

September 24, 2015 

The number of children tested within each month. 

Source: MDHHS Data Warehouse. 

Some children are tested more than once, and may be included in more than one month or year. Lead seamen table 




Blood Lead Levels in Flint Talking Points 
September 24, 2015 

• Promoting the health of our residents is a statewide priority - a priority that includes 
ensuring clean, safe drinking water for all residents and especially children. 

• The results of the Hurley Children's Hospital are under review by the Michigan 
Department of Health and Human Services. 

• The analysis that Hurley conducted is different from the way MDHHS has analyzed data 
regarding blood lead levels in Flint. 

• MDHHS is looking to see if we can replicate the results of the Hurley study to see how 
they achieved their results. 

MDHHS Blood Lead Testing Results in Flint 

• MDDHS data shows a comprehensive look at the data since 2010, years before the 
change in Flint's water source occurred in April 2014. 

• Each year shows a seasonal increase in childhood lead poisoning in the summer months, 
the highest seasonal increase of which occurred in 2010. 

• If elevated blood lead levels were being driven by the change in water, we would expect 
to see the elevated levels remain high after the change in water source, rather than 
follow the seasonal pattern as they did by decreasing in the fall months. 

• All data included in the MDHHS analysis were reported by laboratories directly to 
MDHHS, in accordance with State Law. 

Differences in Analysis 

• MDHHS data provides a much more robust picture of the entire blood lead levels for the 
Flint area, and specifically, accounts for data over the full course of the past five years. 

• Looking at the past five years as a whole provides a much more accurate look at the 
seasonal trends of lead in the area. 

• Seasonal exposure is higher in the summer for a variety of reasons including children 
playing outside in the soil, and when windows are open and lead paint is more likely to 
be in the air. This seasonal increase would be unrelated to the water system. 

• Our data includes children from the entire city, including all medical facilities, rather 
than just Hurley, has a larger age group of children, and includes a much larger sample 
size. 

• The MDHHS analysis looks specifically at the first elevated blood lead level for each 
child, which provides an accurate picture of when first exposure occurred. 

• The Hurley data includes a smaller sample size, much more limited time period (January- 
September of 2013 and 2015 only), and a smaller age group of children. 



WIC Children 


• In homes with infants on WIC, if the household has documentation from an official 
source of unsanitary water supply issues, that family may be eligible to receive ready-to- 
feed formula. Families should contact WIC to see if they are eligible. 

• Each household would have to be looked at on an individual basis. 

• WIC cannot cover bottled water. 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Cc: 


Subject: 


Klotz, Josephine (MSP) 

Tuesday, September 29, 2015 11:42 AM 
Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); GovCalendar 

Mcbride, Bill (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Grijalva, Nancy 
(DCH); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Thelen, Mary Beth (DEQ); Etue, Kriste (MSP); Hollins, Harvey 
(GOV); Clayton, Stacie (GOV); Hansen, Rachel (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) 

RE: RDS/DM/BM/NL/DW/Maggie Pallone/Karen Tommasulo/Col. Etue/HH - Meeting 
Re: Flint Water 


Could we add Lt. Colonel Sands? Colonel Etue would like him to attend also. 
Please and thanks? 

Josephine E. Klotz 

Senior Executive Management Assistant 

to Col. Kriste Kibbey Etue, Director 

Michigan State Police 

333 S. Grand Avenue 

P.O. Box 30634 

Lansing, Ml 48909-0634 

Telephone: (517) 241-0401 

"A PROUD tradition of SERVICE through EXCELLENCE, INTEGRITY, and COURTESY" 


Original Message 

From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Tuesday, September 29, 2015 11:38 AM 
To: GovCalendar 

Cc: Mcbride, Bill (GOV); Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Lyon, Nick (DCH); Grijalva, Nancy (DCH); Wyant, Dan (DEQ); Thelen, 
Mary Beth (DEQ); Etue, Kriste (MSP); Klotz, Josephine (MSP); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Clayton, Stacie (GOV); Hansen, 
Rachel (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Saxton, Thomas (Treasury) 

Subject: Re: RDS/DM/BM/NL/DW/Maggie Pallone/Karen Tommasulo/Col. Etue/HH - Meeting Re: Flint Water 

Please add Tom Saxton to this. 

> On Sep 29, 2015, at 11:36 AM, GovCalendar < G0vCaiendar@micbLg3n.gQv > wrote: 

> 

> 

> 

> HH by Phone 

> 

> 

> Host:|^^J- RH to dial in as host 

> 

> <meeting.ics> 




l 





From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 


Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Thursday, October 01, 2015 4:31 PM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

FW: Flint 


From: Muchmore, Dennis (GOV) 

Sent: Thursday, October 01, 2015 4:30:40 PM (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada) 

To: Snyder, Rick (GOV) 

Cc: Agen, Jarrod (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Subject: Flint 

I talked with Dayne Walling at length today a few minutes ago, and Harvey and I had separate meetings with one of the 
Flint minister groups and then Rep. Neely. Our conversations were cordial for the most with the normal concerns being 
expressed. I told Rep. Neely that I felt he hadn't gotten enough respect and insight into our thoughts on this and we 
expanded our backgrounder for him and he was very appreciative. He actually cancelled a Black Caucus meeting called 
for today on this due to Harvey and our meeting. I have Dan and Nick calling him just to update. 

More importantly, we have the proposal back from DWSD for a reconnect: 

1. Short term reconnect is ok until KWA starts operating; 

2. No reconnect fee and immediate reconnect; 

3. Expenses incurred at actual cost although no estimate at this time 

4. A fixed monthly rate of $662,100 + a commodity rate of $8.93mcf for current 15-16 FY; 

5. Rate is over and above water sales to Genesee County Drain Commission; 

6. A water wholesale adjustment; 

7. Only extends to Flint; 

8. Rates for 16-17 FY would be the same as other customers. 

Mayor Duggan is more than willing to lend his support. 

I'm asking Saxton for a ballpark calculation. We would have to find them the money for this reconnect, but Dayne is 
more than open (as is Ananich to a lesser degree) to finding some revolving fund that they would repay perhaps on an 
extended basis or maybe using some guarantee to reduce the borrowing costs. 


l 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 


Cc: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Importance: 


Wurfel, Sara (GOV) 

Thursday, October 01, 2015 11:42 PM 

Muchmore, Dennis (GOV); Clement, Elizabeth (GOV); Hollins, Harvey (GOV); Agen, 
Jarrod (GOV); Posthumus, Dick (GOV); Walsh, John (GOV); Priest, Chris (GOV); 
Ackerman, Darin (GOV); Lange, Michelle (GOV); Mcbride, Bill (GOV); Brown, Eric (GOV); 
Baird, Richard (GOV) 

Wisniewski, Wendy (GOV); Clayton, Stacie (GOV); Murray, David (GOV); Kennedy, 
Jordan (GOV); Brown, Jessica (GOV); Paciorek, Josh (GOV) 

HIGH PRIORITY: Updated Flint water action plan 

NR 151002 - Flint water action plan.docx; Infographic - Flint Water Action Plan 
10-2-15.pdf; Infographic - Flint water tips 10-2-15.pdf; Flint water - talking points 
(draft 151001).docx 

High 


Hi all - 

Attached are several items pulled together to help announce the new comprehensive action plan related to Flint water 
tomorrow. This build upon past efforts and as aimed to be a real collaborative effort with local, state and federal 
agencies, along with city and community leaders. These items are: 

• News release 

• Infographics - one to summarize action plan and one to help highlight the tips for Flint residents 

• High level points 

The Governor, along with Dan Wyant, Nick Lyon, and Dr. Eden Wells are slated to do an embargoed media conference 
call with select reporters at 11:15 a.m. tomorrow. 

This will be followed by a 1:30 p.m. press conference in Flint led by Directors Wyant and Lyon, moderated by Harvey, 
and including Dr. Wells and Flint Mayor Dayne Walling. EPA Region 5 Administrator Susan Headman dropped out late 
today due to some pending litigation. It's possible that Cong. Kildee and/or State Sen. Anaich and State Reps. Neely and 
Phelps may be participating as well. 

There will also be a clearinghouse of Flint water information available at a new web site - 
www.mldiigan.gov/nintWatc-r . It will be live at 1 p.m. tomorrow. 

Please review and let us know of any Qs, concerns, last edits, of if anything else is needed at all. 

They are going through last review and refinement now. Please do not share materials until we know they are final. 

Thanks much, 

SW 


Sara Wurfel, APR 

Press Secretary | Executive Office of Governor Rick Snyder 


1 



wurfelsfi> michlgan.gov 

517-335-6397, office 
Twitter:@SaraLW 


2 


RICK SNYDER 
GOVERNOR 


State or Michigan 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE 

LANSING 


BRIAN GALLEY 
LT. GOVERNOR 


CONTACTS: 

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 

Sara Wurfel or Dave Murray 

Governor’s Office: 517-335-6397 

Friday, Oct. 2, 2015 

Brad Wurfel. 517-284-6713 
or Karen Tommasulo, 517-284-6714 
Department of Environmental Quality 


Jennifer Eisner. 517-230-9804 
Department of Health and Human Services 



Gov. Rick Snyder: Comprehensive action plan 
will help Flint residents address water concerns 

Collaborative effort with state, federal and city leaders focuses on testing, assistance 


FLINT, Mich. - Flint residents need to have access to safe, clean, water now and long into the 
future, Gov. Rick Snyder said, announcing a comprehensive action plan created with state, 
federal and city leaders to address concerns about drinking water. 

The water leaving Flint’s drinking water system is safe to drink, but some families with lead 
plumbing in their homes or service connections could experience higher levels of lead in the 
water that comes out of their faucets. 

The action plan focuses on increasing water testing, offering additional precautions for families 
with lead plumbing in their homes, and providing long-term solutions to address the city’s water 
infrastructure challenges. The plan was created at Snyder’s direction by the Michigan 
Departments of Environmental Quality (DEQ) and Health and Human Services (DHHS), the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and the city of Flint. 

“We are focused on helping ensure safe, clean, accessible drinking water and addressing and 
mitigating concerns and protecting public health,” Snyder said. “Today’s action plan builds upon 
ongoing work with local, state and federal agencies and our partnership with city and community 
leaders. Together, we are working to ensure that all Flint residents have accurate information 
and know that help is available to address potential problems.” 

The city and the state also are working together to gather more data to ensure the water that 
leaves the treatment plant as well as the water that arrives in Flint homes is safe for all 
residents. The plan includes: 

• Testing in Flint public schools immediately to ensure that drinking water is safe, with 
testing also available at no cost to any other school in Flint. 

• Offering free water testing to Flint residents to assure their drinking water is safe. 

• Providing free water filters to residents with concerns or who are included in state 
assistance programs. 

• Expanding health exposure testing of individual homes. 




• Accelerating corrosion controls in the Flint drinking water system. 

• Accelerating water system improvements to address replacing lead service lines. 

• Expediting the completion of the Karegnondi Water Authority pipeline. 

• Expanding a Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee to ensure the best 
technology, practices and science are being followed by adding an expert from the 
Environmental Protection Agency’s Office of Research and Development to the group. 

• Naming Dr. Eden Wells, chief medical executive for the Michigan Department of Health 
and Human Services, as the Flint drinking water public health adviser. 

• Boosting a comprehensive lead education program to make sure residents have detailed 
information about how to protect themselves and their homes. 

Residents can have their water tested by calling 81 0-787-6537 and pressing 1 , or emailing 
flintwater@cityofflint.com . The DEQ is covering the cost of this testing. 

State leaders have been working closely with state and federal lawmakers to tap resources at 
all levels of government to address concerns. 

State health experts said there has been an increase in elevated childhood blood lead levels in 
some specific communities. Initial analysis of MDHHS data found that blood lead levels of 
children in Flint have followed an expected seasonal trend. While this analysis for Flint as a 
whole remains true, a comprehensive and detailed review breaking down data by ZIP codes 
with the city revealed that MDHHS data is consistent with a study presented recently by Hurley 
Children’s Hospital. 

“While we cannot conclusively say that the water source change is the sole cause of the 
increase, this analysis supports our efforts as we take active steps to reduce all potential lead 
exposures in Flint,” MDHHS Director Nick Lyon said. “As part of this, we are working closely 
with our public and private partners to provide Flint residents on MDHHS assistance programs 
with free water filters and inform families about the steps they can take to reduce all lead 
exposures in their home.” 

As a part of the action plan, MDHHS is making National Sanitation Foundation certified water 
filters available to clients who are active Family Independence Program, Food Assistance 
Program, Child Development and Care or Social Security Insurance recipients. 

“This action plan offers concrete steps we will take in a local, state and federal partnership to 
ensure all Flint residents have safe water to drink,” DEQ Director Dan Wyant said. “The DEQ 
will work closely with the city to gather further data to ensure the water that leaves Flint’s system 
as well as the water that arrives in Flint homes is safe to drink.” 

Additional information is available at www.michigan.gov/flintwater . 



Testing in Flint public schools Immediately to ensure that 
drinking water is safe, with testing also available at no cost to any 

At H Ay c* ^ $ s 1 t 

!vS V^vl ivv? iH 5 Is? U.v 

Offering free water testing to Flint residents to assure 
their drinking water is safe. 


Providing free water filters to residents with concerns or who are 
included in state assistance programs. 

Expanding health exposure testing of individual homes. 

Accelerating corrosion controls in the Flint drinking water system. 

Accelerating water system Improvements to address replacing 

W V V J V/ 


eao service lines. 


Expediting the completion of the Karegnondi Water Authority 


Expanding a Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory 
Committee to ensure the best technology, practices and science are 
being followed by adding an expert from the Environmental 
Protection Agency's Office of Research and Development to the 
group. 


m Wells, chief medical executive for the Michigan 
Health and Human Services, as the Flint drinking 


watei 


BOOStll 


!> lead education program to make sure 


residents have detailed Information about how to protect 
themselves and their homes. 


To yom'xm . teW 1 st 




can asso craai? 







& & 


1 «K« 1 P% 111 
Ik# 1 ## %# %# 111 
I I 


: Jl § 1 % 


I V IP 


1 'I #1 1 # .kk Ik# 


% «SS% .<#% <# 




fe I ^ H ^ ^ H %S# tjl I ll ^ IJI l\ %S# N fc fe ^ ^S# jNk ^ ^ %SS^ 1 |*J^ %S#* 


fpfai if iriiriix 

1 %$#■ %# kk lill % 1 %# 1 1 %# 


s I 

a sSs> &,«&. 


S * i§ « 


ril I r-'-'t! 
























































Flint Drinking Water Action Plan 
Talking Points 

Overall Messaging 

• Repeated testing shows the water leaving Flint’s drinking water system is safe to 
drink and meets all federal guidelines, including lead. 

• After the switch the Flint River, the compliance testing protocol yielded results of 
6 ppb in December 2014 and 1 1 ppb in June 2015. Both results were below the 
federal action level of 1 5 ppb. 

• However, we recognize some residents experience higher levels of lead in the 
water that comes out of their faucets because of lead plumbing in the home, and 
that’s a concern. 

• Out of an abundance of caution, we want to address the needs of all Flint 
families, and so we have developed an action plan that includes both short- and 
long-term solutions. 

• The state plan focuses on increasing water testing, offering additional 
precautions for families, and providing long-term solutions to address the city’s 
water infrastructure. 

Messaging regarding the action plan 

The city and the state are working together to gather more data to ensure the water that 
leaves the treatment plant as well as the water that arrives in Flint homes is safe for all 
residents. 

• Immediately test Flint public schools to ensure that drinking water is safe. 
Testing will also be available at no cost to any other school in Flint. 

o Although Flint’s drinking water meets all federal requirements, the state 
wants to take extra steps to ensure that drinking water is safe for the city’s 
children. 

o The state will fund this testing (about $30,000) at no cost to the city or the 
local schools, and make the results publicly available. 

• Expand health exposure testing of individual residences. 

o To double-check its data as well as provide residents with an additional 
layer of assurance, the DEQ will conduct more tests at Flint properties. 

o The Technical Advisory Committee will determine the scope of this 
expanded testing. 

• Offer water testing at no cost to Flint residents to assure water is safe. 

o Although all testing indicates water in the city of Flint meets all federal 
standards, we understand some residents are concerned. 

o To ensure water in individual homes is safe, free water testing is available 
to all Flint residents. 

o We encourage anyone with a concern to get their water tested. 

o Contact the city water department to have your water tested. 

• Accelerate optimizing corrosion controls in the Flint drinking water system. 




o A fully optimized corrosion control system can help coat the inside of pipes 
to minimize the amount of lead that enters the drinking water after it 
leaves the treatment plant. 

o This is a helpful step that can help minimize lead system-wide, and we’re 
pleased the city is moving to take this step. 

o If asked: This was not initially required because a fully optimized corrosion 
control system is not federally required in many water systems. Even 
today, since Flint is meeting all federal standards, this fully optimized 
system is not required. However, to address public concerns and ensure 
every possible precaution is taken, the city is moving forward with 
installing this corrosion control system. 

Expand the “Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee” to 
ensure the best technology, practices and science are being utilized, and 
add an expert from the EPA’s Office of Research and Development to the 
group. 

o The Safe Drinking Water Technical Advisory Committee will meet Oct. 7 to 
discuss fully optimizing the corrosion control system, expanding testing of 
at-risk properties, and other topics. 

o Tom Burke, the Deputy Assistant Administrator of EPA’s Office of 
Research and Development as well as the EPA’s Science Advisor, will 
participate on the committee. Prior to joining EPA, he held prominent 
positions at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health and 
founded the Johns Hopkins Risk Sciences and Public Policy Institute. He 
brings substantial expertise, and we’re pleased he is able join the 
committee. 

Accelerate water system improvements to address replacement of lead 
service lines. 

o Regardless of the drinking water source - whether it be DWSD, the Flint 
River or Lake Huron - the only permanent fix for lead is to replace all 
18,000 of the private lead service lines in the city. These are the lines on 
private property that lead from the curb to individual homes. 

o This is a problem in communities statewide, and one we want to address 
with a long-term solution. 

o The state and EPA are working together to find a way for the city to 
access Drinking Water Revolving Loan funds for the work. 

Expedite completion of Karegnondi Water Authority. 

o The move to the Flint River was always a temporary measure until the 
connection to the KWA and to Lake Huron was completed. 

o This is the ultimate goal of the venture, and the state and locals will work 
together to speed up completion of the connection. 

o 

Name Dr. Eden Wells as Flint Drinking Water Public Health Advisor. 

o Dr. Wells is the Director for the Preventive Medicine Residency at the 
University of Michigan School of Public Health in Ann Arbor as well as the 
Chief Medical Executive for MDHHS. 



o 


She brings years of experience in epidemiology and preventative medicine 
to the issue, and we’re thrilled to have her expertise. 

o Dr. Wells will coordinate with Hurley Medical Center to share data on 
blood lead levels in children, as well as address other emerging issues. 

Provide water filters to residents of Flint. 

o As an additional precaution, water filters will be available to low-income 
families. 

o This provides another safeguard to ensure everyone in the city of Flint has 
access to clean drinking water that they feel confident drinking. 

Expand a comprehensive lead education initiative. 

o Lead plumbing is common in homes built prior to 1986, and anyone in the 
state with lead pipes in their home can take some extra precautions to 
minimize lead in their drinking water. 

o It takes time for lead to accumulate in drinking water from plumbing, and 
so flushing your pipes prior to using them can minimize your exposure. 

■ To flush your pipes, run the water until it’s as cold as it will go. This 
can take as little as 5 to 30 seconds if you have recently flushed the 
toilet or otherwise used water in your home, or as long as 2 to 5 
minutes if you have not used any water in hours. 

■ In the city of Flint, running the water for 5 minutes only costs about 
3-16 cents, depending on your faucet. 

o Additionally, more lead gets into hot water than cold water. Use only cold 
water for drinking, cooking and making baby formula. 



From: 

Brian Larkin <blarkin@flintandgenesee.org> 

Sent: 

Wednesday, October 07, 2015 3:38 PM 

To: 

Hollins, Harvey (GOV) 

Cc: 

Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

Subject: 

Flint City Council KWA Vote 


Still waiting on hearing back from the city to get the original resolution but here are the mlive pieces that covered it 
from March until July. The meeting when the vote was held was March 25, 2013 

March 25 th 2013 Flint council supports buying water from Lake Huron through KWA 

http://www.mlive.com/news/fiint/index.ssf/2013/03/ilint city council again dday.htmi 

The Flint City Council voted 7-1 to get 16 million gallons per day from the Karegnondi Water Authority. 

7 th Ward couneilperson Dale Weighill was absent 
3 rd Ward couneilperson Bryant Nolden opposed 
The rest were in favor. 


March 25 th , 2013 Flint City Council approves resolution to buy water from Karegnondi, state approval still needed 

http://www.mljve.com/naws/fjint/indeK.ssf/2013/03/fnnt city council approves re.html 
Under the proposal, Flint would get 16 million gallons per day of raw water from Lake Huron, pipe it to Flint 
for treatment and then sell it to customers throughout the City. Another 2 million gallons per day would come 
from the Flint River and will be treated in Flint. DEQ told the city it needed to get 18 million gallons per day or 
there would have to be additional work done at Flint's water plant. Flint’s water plant and the Flint River is 
currently the backup for Flint and Genesee County, however, the plant only operates four times per year. 


April 12 th State gives Flint OK to join Karegnondi Water Authority project, but Detroit gets to 
make final offer 


fattp://www.mlive,com/nevvs/flint/mdex,8sf/20i3/Q4/state gives flint ok l.html 


The city of Flint has the state's blessing to join in construction of the planned Karegnondi Water 
Author! typipelme project once it reviews a final offer from the city of Detroit on Monday, April 15, 


April 19 th Governor steps into water war; set to meet with Genesee, Flint, Detroit today 



The meeting comes in the same week that the Flint and Genesee County rejected a final offer to 
continue buying water from Detroit and two days after Detroit gave Flint a notice of termination of its 
1965 water contract. 


April 19 th Detroit gives notice: It’s terminating water contract covering Flint, Genesee County in 
one year 


http://wvvw.tnlive.eoTn/news/fli;it/i?Kiex.ssf/20.iA/04/detroit. gives notice its termlhtrnl 


The city of Detroit has given notice that it's terminating a nearly 50-year-old contract for selling water 
to Flint and the county next year. 


July 23 rd Flint River now an option for drinking water following Detroit’s termination of 


.miivexom/news/t1if^t/if^dex.ssf/2{>i.^/o i 7/'citv readying wafer plant 


t.html 


The Flint River was not a Gable option to provide drinking water to city residents when the water 
relationship between Flint and Detroit was stable. But river water might he used temporarily as the 
city's water supply now that Flint signed an agreement with the Karegnondi Water Authority and will 
get up to 18 million gallons per day of raw water in 2016 from Lake Huron. The Flint River hadn't 
been an option, city officials previously said, because upgrades to Flint’s water plant would be too 
expensive, the river didn't provide enough capacity to serve Flint residents' water needs and the 
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality would not allow it. 


2 



Brian Larkin 

Director, Core initiatives 

Flint & Genesee Chamber of Commerce 

519 S. Saginaw Street * Suite 200 * Flint, Mi 48502 

ip) 810.600,1406 ip) 810.600.1461 

www.FiintandGenesee.org « BCark Fj.i t andG e n e se . or 


CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: 

This email message and any accompanying data or files is confidential and may contain privileged information intended only for the named recipient(s). If you are not 
the intended recipient(s), you are hereby notified that the dissemination, distribution, and or copying of this message is strictly prohibited. If you receive this message 
in error, or are not the named recipient(s), please notify the sender at the email address above, delete this email from your computer, and destroy any copies in any 
form immediately. Receipt by anyone other than the named recipient(s) is not a waiver of any attorney-client, work product, or other applicable privilege. 


3 



From: 

Sent: 

To: 

Subject: 

Attachments: 


Brian Larkin 

Director, Core initiatives 

Flint & Genesee Chamber of Commerce 

519 S. Saginaw Street » Suite 200 » Flint, Mi 48502 

(P) 810.600.1406 (H 810.600.1461 

www.FiintandGenesee.org « 8Larkin@FlintandC5enesee.org 

CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: 

This email message and any accompanying data or files is confidential and may contain privileged information intended only for the named recipient(s). If you are not 
the intended recipient(s), you are hereby notified that the dissemination, distribution, and or copying of this message is strictly prohibited. If you receive this message 
in error, or are not the named recipient(s), please notify the sender at the email address above, delete this email from your computer, and destroy any copies in any 
form immediately. Receipt by anyone other than the named recipient(s) is not a waiver of any attorney-client, work product, or other applicable privilege. 


Brian Larkin <blarkin@flintandgenesee.org> 

Wednesday, October 07, 2015 4:14 PM 
Clayton, Stacie (GOV) 

RE: Flint City Council KWA Vote 

KWA Contract (amended) 130165.2. pdf; CC Meeting Minutes 3-25-2013 (l).doc 


From: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) [mailto:claytons3@michigan.gov] 

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 4:08 PM 
To: Brian Larkin <blarkin@flintandgenesee.org> 

Subject: RE: Flint City Council KWA Vote 

Thank you, Brian. Please copy me also when you send the actual resolution. Your help is greatly 
appreciated. 

Stacie 


From: Brian Larkin [ CO.c? .UTg ; bj.ark I .OlSTfM 0 : .57.CE 1 

Sent: Wednesday, October 07, 2015 3:38 PM 
To: Hollins, Harvey (GOV) < holhnsh@rnic:higan-gov > 

Cc: Clayton, Stacie (GOV) < ciavtons3@michigan.gov > 
Subject: Flint City Council KWA Vote 


Still waiting on hearing back from the city to get the original resolution but here are the mlive pieces that covered it 
from March until July. The meeting when the vote was held was March 25, 2013 


March 25 lh 2013 Flint council supports buying water from Lake Huron through KWA 


The Flint City Council voted 7-1 to get 16 million gallons per day from the Karegnondi Water Authority. 


1 




7 th Ward councilperson Dale Weighill was absent 
3 rd Ward councilperson Bryant Nolden opposed 
The rest were in favor. 


March 25 th , 2013 Flint City Council approves resolution to buy water from Karegnondi, state approval still needed 

http://www.mlsve.CQm/news/fligit/igidsx.ssf/2013/03/fijnt dty council approves re.html 
Under the proposal, Flint would get 16 million gallons per day of raw water from Lake Huron, pipe It to Flint 
for treatment and then sell it to customers throughout the City. Another 2 million gallons per day would come 
from the Flint River and wall be treated in Flint. DEQ told the city it needed to get 18 million gallons per day or 
there would have to be additional work done at Flint’s water plant. Flint’s water plant and the Flint River is 
currently the backup for Flint and Genesee County, however, the plant only operates four times per year. 


?://wwvv.mlive.com/news/f!int/index.ssf/2or^/o4/state gives flint ok thtml 


The city of Flint has the state's blessing to join in construction of the planned Karegnondi Water 
Author! typipeline project once it reviews a final offer from the city of Detroit on Monday, April 15. 


April 19 th Governor steps into water war; set to meet with Genesee, Flint, Detroit today 


http://www.mhve.com/news/hint/lndex.ssi 720 r 3 / 04 /governor steps into water war.htmWmearf river de 
fault 


The meeting comes in the same week that the Flint and Genesee County rejected a final offer to 
continue buying water from Detroit and two days after Detroit gave Flint a notice of termination of its 
1965 water contract. 


April 19 th Detroit gives notice: it’s terminating water contract covering Flint, Genesee Comity in 
one year 



The city of Detroit has given notice that it's terminating a nearly 50-year-old contract for selling water 
to Flint and the county next year. 


July 23 rd Flint River now an option for drinking water following Detroit’s termination of 
contract 


The Flint River was not a viable option to provide drinking water to city residents when the water 
relationship between Flint and Detroit was stable. But river water might be used temporarily as the 
city’s water supply now that Flint signed an agreement with the Karegnondi Water Authority and will 
get up to 18 million gallons per day of raw water in 2016 from Lake Huron. The Flint Ri ver hadn’t 
been an option, city officials previously said, because upgrades to Flint’s water plant would be too 
expensive, the river didn’t provide enough capacity to serve Flint residents' water needs and the 
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality would not allow it. 


Brian Larkin 


3 



Director, Core initiatives 


Flint Si Genesee Chamber of Commerce 

519 S. Saginaw Street * Suite 200 » Flint, Mi 48502 

(Pj 310.600.14Q6^^H^HHk 810.600.1461 

www.FnntandGenesee.org * BLarkingS FlintandGeriesee.org 

CONFIDENTIALITY NOTICE: 

This email message and any accompanying data or files is confidential and may contain privileged information intended only for the named recipient(s). If you are not 
the intended recipient(s), you are hereby notified that the dissemination, distribution, and or copying of this message is strictly prohibited. If you receive this message 
in error, or are not the named recipient(s), please notify the sender at the email address above, delete this email from your computer, and destroy any copies in any 
form immediately. Receipt by anyone other than the named recipient(s) is not a waiver of any attorney-client, work product, or other applicable privilege. 


4 



Resolution: 


130165.2 

Presented: 3 - 11-13 

Adopted: 3 - 25-13 


AMENDED RESOLUTION TO PURCHASE CAPACITY 
FROM KAREGNONDI WATER AUTHORITY 


BY THE MAYOR: 

The Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) is a governmental consortium of cities and 
counties in southeastern Michigan that was created to build a water pipeline that will provide 
water from Lake Huron to interested communities in Sanilac, Lapeer, and Genesee counties. 
The incorporating bodies that created the KWA are Sanilac County, Lapeer County, Genesee 
County, the City of Flint, and the City of Lapeer. 

The City of Flint is currently in a year to year contract with the City of Detroit for the 
purchase of water. A study was conducted that projected that staying with Detroit will cost the 
region $2.1 billion over the next 25 years. In contrast, if the region builds its own pipeline, the 
projected costs are $1.9 billion over the same period. After the initial 25 year period, the 
projected costs would be less then 25% of the projected water costs from Detroit. 

In order to build the pipeline, the KWA needs commitment from its members regarding 
the capacity that each member will purchase in the pipeline. The KWA is allowed to withdraw 
85 million gallons of water per day. Capacity is available to members in increments of 1 million 
gallons per day known as units. For each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer 
shall pay to the KWA a one time fee of $32,300.00. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the 
KWA not less then $32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated amount not 
to exceed $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the bonds are paid in full. If it is 
determined that the costs per unit will exceed $355,300.00 the buyer has a right to cancel the 
contract. 

The purchase of capacity along with the payment of other costs necessary to operate the 
pipeline gives the member a right to water for sale to its customers. The buyer has a right to 
resell capacity and water rights. Each party entering into a capacity contract shall also be 
entitled to appoint additional board members equal to the party’s percentage share of the total 
capacity under contract. 

The City of Flint has decided that it is in its long term best interests to enter into a 
contract with the KWA to purchase SIXTEEN (16) units of capacity, plus TWO (2) units from 
the Flint River. 



IT IS RESOLVED that City officials are authorized to enter into a contract with KWA 
to purchase SIXTEEN (16) units of capacity, plus TWO (2) units from the Flint River. 

IT IS FURTHER RESOLVED that the City Administrator is authorized to provide 
KWA information needed to administer the contract and, with approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. 


APPROVED AS TO FORM: 



APPROVED AS TO FINANCE: 


Gerald Ambrose 
Finance Director 


APPROVED BY MAYOR: 


Dayne Walling 
Mayor 


APPROVED BY CITY COUNCIL 
ON: March 25. 2013 

Inez Brown /J 
Clerk, City of Flint 


APPROVED BY 
CITY COUNCIL 

MAR 25 2013 

■•A :L>v 


S:\JP\Ordinances and Resos\KWA.03.08.13.doc 


City of Flint, Michigan 

Third Floor, City Hall 
1101 S. Saginaw Street 
Flint, Michigan 48502 
www. cityofflint. com 



Meeting Minutes - Draft 

Monday, March 25, 2013 
5:33 PM 

Agenda amended to include Board of Hospital Managers appointments 

Council Chambers 

CITY COUNCIL 

Scott Kincaid, President, Ward 9 
Bryant W. Nolden, Vice President, Ward 3 

Claudia Croom, Ward 1 Jacqueline Poplar, Ward 2 

Joshua M. Freeman, Ward 4 Bernard Lawler, Ward 5 

Sheldon A. Neeley, Ward 6 Dale K. Weigh ill, Ward 7 

Michael J. Sarginson, Ward 8 


Inez M. Brown, City Clerk 




CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


CALL TO ORDER 

President Scott Kincaid called the meeting to order at 5:33 p.m. 

ROLL CALL 

Councilperson Michael Sarginson arrived at 5:37 p.m. 

Present: Councilperson: Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson 

Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
Kincaid, Councilperson Weighill and Councilperson Croom 

PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE 

Councilperson Sheldon Neeley led the Pledge of Allegiance. 

SPECIAL ORDER 

130217 Special Order/Information & Discussion/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) 

A Special Order as requested by Council President Scott Kincaid to continue 
discussion and review of information on the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA). 

Presented 


PETITIONS AND UNOFFICIAL COMMUNICATIONS 



City of Flint, Michigan Page 1 Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 



City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 2 


Printed on 4/2/2013 






CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 



130196 Flint City Council/Public Notice/Special City Council Meeting/March 18, 2013 

Public Notice posted March 14, 2013, re: The Flint City Council will hold a Special 
City Council Meeting, followed by a Finance Committee Meeting, at 5:30 p.m. 
Monday, March 18, 2013, in the City Council Chambers, 3rd Floor, City Flail, to 
consider a contract with the Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA). 


This matter was Placed on File. The motion carried. 





PUBLIC SPEAKERS 
ROLL CALL 

Councilperson Dale Weighill left at approximately 1 p.m. 

Present: Councilperson: Councilperson Poplar, Vice President Nolden, Councilperson 

Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, 
Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: Councilperson: Councilperson Weighill 


APPOINTMENTS 



City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 4 


Printed on 4/2/2013 







City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 5 


Printed on 4/2/2013 




CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 






City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 7 


Printed on 4/2/2013 




CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 



RESOLUTIONS 

130165.1 Amended Resolution/Contract/City of Flint/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) 

Amended resolution resolving that city officials are authorized to enter into a 
contract with Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) to purchase fifteen (15) units of 
capacity, AND, resolving that the City Administrator is authorized to provide KWA 
information needed to administer the contract, and, with approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. [NOTE: For 
each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer shall pay to the KWA a 
one-time fee of $32,300. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the KWA not less than 
$32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated 
amount NOT-TO-EXCEED $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the 
bonds are paid in full. If it is determined that the costs per unit will exceed 
$355,300.00, the buyer has a right to cancel the contract. Over the next 25 years, it 
is expected that continuing with Detroit will cost the region $2.1 billion, compared to 
$1.9 billion with a pipeline.] [NOTE: Contract not included.] [NOTE: Resolution 
amended from 18 to 15 units of capacity.] 


A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, 
that this matter be Amended. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 5 - Vice President Nolden, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, 

Councilperson Neeley and Councilperson Sarginson 

No: 3 - Councilperson Poplar, President Kincaid and Councilperson Croom 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 

130165.2 Amended Resolution/Contract/City of Flint/Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) 

Amended resolution resolving that city officials are authorized to enter into a 
contract with Karegnondi Water Authority (KWA) to purchase sixteen (16) units 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 8 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


of capacity, AND, resolving that the City Administrator is authorized to provide KWA 
information needed to administer the contract, and, with approval of the Chief Legal 
Officer, to make minor (non-material) modifications to the contract. [NOTE: For 
each unit of capacity that a member purchases, the buyer shall pay to the KWA a 
one-time fee of $32,300. Additionally, the buyer shall pay to the KWA not less than 
$32,300.00 per unit per year until such time as water is made available to the 
buyer. After water is made available, the buyer shall pay to the KWA an estimated 
amount NOT-TO-EXCEED $355,300.00 per unit per year until such time that the 
bonds are paid in full. If it is determined that the costs per unit will exceed 
$355,300.00, the buyer has a right to cancel the contract. Over the next 25 years, it 
is expected that continuing with Detroit will cost the region $2.1 billion, compared to 
$1.9 billion with a pipeline.] [NOTE: Contract not included.] [NOTE: Resolution 
amended from 15 to 16 units of capacity.] 


A motion was made by Councilperson Neeley, seconded by Councilperson Freeman, 
that this matter be Adopted. The motion carried by the following vote: 

Aye: 7 - Councilperson Poplar, Councilperson Freeman, Councilperson Lawler, 

Councilperson Neeley, Councilperson Sarginson, President Kincaid and 
Councilperson Croom 

No: 1 - Vice President Nolden 

Absent: 1 - Councilperson Weighill 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 9 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 


RESOLUTIONS - MAY BE REFERRED FROM S.A. 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 10 


Printed on 4/2/2013 





CITY COUNCIL 


Meeting Minutes - Draft 


March 25, 2013 



MEETING SCHEDULE 
ADDITIONAL COUNCIL DISCUSSION 
ADJOURNMENT 

Having no further business, Council President Scott Kincaid adjourned the meeting at 8:59 
p.m. 

Respectfully transcribed and submitted, 

Janell Johnson. Administrative Secretary to Citv Council 


City of Flint, Michigan 


Page 11 


Printed on 4/2/2013 






